AdvertisementBy THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 4, 2018, 4:35 P.M. E.D.T.
In a story April 1 about the Trump administration's treatment of skilled immigrants, The Associated Press reported erroneously that the administration ended a program to admit foreign entrepreneurs. A judge ruled in December that the program must take effect, though the administration has not approved any applications and says it will rescind the program.A corrected version of the story is below:Trump says he wants skilled migrants but creates new hurdlesTrump wants the US immigration system to focus on skills instead of family ties, but his administration is making it harder on skilled immigrantsBy NICHOLAS RICCARDIAssociated PressIt may be a while before President Donald Trump gets another chance at creating a new, "merit-based" immigration system, a keystone of his four-part plan that Congress rejected last month. In the meantime, his administration is busy making it harder, not easier, for skilled migrants to come work in the United States.The administration says it will end an Obama-era program to admit foreign entrepreneurs who want to start companies in the United States. It is more aggressively scrutinizing visas to skilled workers from other countries. And it is contemplating ending a provision that allows spouses of those skilled workers to be employed in the U.S.AdvertisementThe administration and its backers contend it's trying to fix flaws in the existing, employer-centric skilled immigration system while advocating for a complete overhaul of America's immigration system.Advertisement"The stuff that they're actually doing is not so much restricting skilled immigration as enforcing the law," said Mark Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies, which supports reducing immigration. "They're rolling back some of the extralegal measures that other administrations have taken."A primary avenue for skilled immigrants to enter the United States is the H1B visa for specialty workers, which is heavily used by the technology industry. About 85,000 visas are issued annually in a lottery system. Some critics argue they are a way for companies to avoid hiring U.S. citizens; Trump himself has said H1B recipients shouldn't even be considered skilled.In 2016, two technology workers sued Disney, alleging 250 U.S. employees were laid off and many were forced to train replacements who were hired on H1B visas. A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit, saying Disney was following existing immigration laws.The Trump administration has increased its scrutiny of H1B applications, requiring renewals be submitted in person and asking for additional proof the workers are needed and are being paid top tier."This increase reflects our commitment to protecting the integrity of the immigration system," said Joanne Fereirra, a spokeswoman for U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. She added that 92.5 percent of the visas are still approved, only two percentage points lower than under the Obama administration in 2016.Still, businesses have noticed a change."We've got employees that are going through the process, who have gone through such a level of scrutiny and interrogatory that is unprecedented," said Dean Garfield, president of the Information Technology Industry Council, which advocates for H1B visas and has had one of its own workers have to move back overseas because of delays in approving the requisite visa.The extra time with H1B visas is only part of the administration's changes to skilled, work-based immigration.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, Trump signed an executive order that directed all government agencies to "rigorously enforce and administer the laws governing entry into the United States of workers from abroad" to ensure the maximum number of U.S. citizens have jobs. The order also called for shifting H1Bs from lower-paid workers to higher-paid ones who truly have skills that can't be obtained from the native workforce.AdvertisementThe administration also moved to stop an Obama administration program that was about to start last year to let international entrepreneurs who start companies in the United States live in the country for renewable, 30-month stints. Though a judge in December blocked the government's effort prevent the program from taking effect, the Trump administration says it has not approved any of the about 10 entries it has received and still plans to end the program.Also in December, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security released its new regulatory agenda which included further, unspecified changes to the H1B program. The administration also indicated it will roll back the STEM OPT program expanded by President Barack Obama that lets international science and technology students work legally in the U.S. for up to three years.Meanwhile, the State Department said last week it is seeking to further enhance vetting of potential immigrants and visitors by requiring all U.S. visa applicants to submit their social media usernames, previous email addresses and phone numbers — information that was previously sought only from applicants identified for extra scrutiny. The department estimates 710,000 immigrant visa applicants and 14 million non-immigrant visa applicants will be affected annually.Akash Negi, 26, graduated last month with a master's in sciences and analytics from Pennsylvania's Harrisburg University of Science and Technology that he earned while working as a big data analyst at JP Morgan Chase. Negi moved to the United States after his father got a diplomatic visa as part of a job at the United Nations, but his legal residency doesn't include a work permit.He was able to work while a student but is waiting for his STEM OPT visa to remain employed, and is concerned Trump will gut the program.Negi noted he understands Trump's stated goals of protecting U.S. workers but says he's going about it incorrectly."Any country wants to protect its own citizens, but you don't just end the program when you don't have your own population trained," Negi said.The Trump administration has also signaled it may end another Obama-era program that allowed spouses of H1B visa holders to work legally in the U.S. Many of these people have been in the U.S. for years, sometimes long enough to have children who are now U.S. citizens, yet can face a decades-long wait for a green card. The prospect of being unable to work is a shock to them."I would like to make my own living. I am qualified and skilled," said Anushri Maru, 35, a business analyst in Houston, adding she's baffled her new home doesn't want her talents. "I'm not sure they understand that we are skilled immigrants."We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementSupported byOp-Ed ContributorBy Pramila JayapalSEATTLE — Seventeen years ago, I celebrated my first Independence Day as a United States citizen. I couldn’t have predicted then that I would one day have the enormous privilege of being the first Indian-American woman to serve in the United States House of Representatives, and one of only six members of Congress who are naturalized citizens.After arriving here from India at age 16, I spent more than a dozen years on an alphabet soup of visas — F1, H1B and more — before I finally got my green card through marriage to an American. Some years later, I was awarded a fellowship from the Institute of Current World Affairs, which allowed me to spend two years living in my birth country. I just had to come back to the United States once a year to keep my permanent resident status current. When I became pregnant during the second year of the program, my husband and I planned to return to the United States in time for my last trimester, so I could deliver the baby at home, and then return to India.That plan did not work out. Just two weeks before we were scheduled to board our flight back to the United States, I developed a leak in my amniotic sac. My son was born prematurely at 26.5 weeks, weighing less than two pounds. I was now faced with a choice. In order to preserve my permanent resident status, I needed to return to the United States within weeks of his birth. But he was so tiny and in such critical condition that he could not fly, and I refused to leave his bedside knowing he might die.So I stayed in India. I lost my green card status and only through the help and hard work of the institute was I able to regain my permanent residence status and return to the United States three months later when my son was finally able to fly.I became determined to get my citizenship as soon as I was eligible so that I would never again face the prospect of being separated from my son, who was a United States citizen by virtue of being the child of a United States citizen father. Part of the agreement that had allowed me to return to the United States again and regain my permanent residence status was that I would have to start from zero to qualify for citizenship again. That process took three years.When I finally walked into the cavernous hall at the old location of Immigration and Naturalization Services (now called United States Citizenship and Immigration Services) south of downtown Seattle, I was prepared for a simple transaction that would finally grant me citizenship and ensure that I would always be with my son. I did not anticipate the emotion that would come with the moment, or the way it would shape my future, and my understanding of this country.There were hundreds of others at the ceremony from all over the world, and I could hear languages from every continent spoken. We all carried small American flags. Grandparents held children; moms and dads held hands. As we took the oath of citizenship, the solemnity of the moment spiked through me. Tears welled up and rolled down my cheeks as I took in the mixed emotions of renouncing any allegiance to my birth country of India where I had been a citizen for 35 years and embracing my new country.America, a country that had embraced me as a 16-year-old who had come here by myself to study and build a life of better opportunity.America, a country built on the idea of being a refuge for those in need, “the tired masses, yearning to breathe free.”America, a country that has always celebrated itself as a nation of immigrants.In that moment, as I took my oath, I realized how lucky I was. I knew that my future had opened up, and that citizenship would offer me the chance to seek opportunity and to take part in our democracy. I knew, too, that with those freedoms and opportunity came enormous responsibility: to do everything I could to preserve and build our democracy, to vote, and to use my life to pay it forward and ensure opportunity for others.I became an immigrant, civil and human rights advocate, then the first South Asian elected to the Washington State Legislature and the only woman of color in the Washington State Senate, and then was elected in 2016 to the United States Congress.These are difficult times for immigrants and for Americans across our country. President Trump has harnessed the fear and prejudice that have accompanied every wave of immigrants in United States history, and stoked those fears to further his own agenda.Restricting immigration from Muslim-majority countries, and cracking down on unauthorized immigration in a way that tears families apart and creates an atmosphere of fear, cuts at the very fabric of what really does make America great: the diversity that is our greatest strength.This Fourth of July, as I remember my own naturalization ceremony and give thanks for the honor of being a United States citizen and a member of Congress, I call on the president and my fellow Americans to remember our history. What makes America great is our commitment to our values of inclusivity and opportunity for all. Immigration is about more than just who comes here and who is allowed to stay. It is about who we are as a country and what we are willing to stand up for.Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat, is the United States representative for Washington’s Seventh Congressional District.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. AdvertisementCollapseSEE MY OPTIONS
AdvertisementBy VINDU GOELFEB. 8, 2017
“The people of Arizona will be very happy. It’s a lot of jobs,” President Trump said after Intel’s C.E.O. said the company will invest $7 billion to build a new factory.SAN FRANCISCO — Intel, the world’s largest computer chip manufacturer, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory in Arizona, adding 3,000 jobs, the company’s chief executive said on Wednesday after meeting with President Trump at the White House.The completion of the factory, which will complement two other Intel semiconductor plants in Chandler, Ariz., had been under consideration for several years.Standing beside Mr. Trump in the Oval Office, Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, said the company had decided to proceed now because of “the tax and regulatory policies we see the administration pushing forward.”Mr. Trump said: “The people of Arizona will be very happy. It’s a lot of jobs.”He said Intel called the White House several weeks ago to coordinate the announcement. That outreach illustrates the tightrope that Silicon Valley companies are walking as they deal with a president most of them did not want to see in office.AdvertisementIntel was one of nearly 130 companies that signed a legal brief challenging Mr. Trump’s Jan. 27 executive order temporarily blocking the entry of all refugees and of immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim nations. Earlier, Mr. Krzanich criticized the order on Twitter, declaring, “As a company co-founded by an immigrant, we support lawful immigration.” (Intel’s third employee and longtime chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, survived the Holocaust and arrived in the United States after fleeing the Soviet invasion of his native Hungary in 1956.)AdvertisementYet Intel, like Apple and other large technology companies, also supports the Trump administration’s plans to reduce corporate taxes and regulations. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Krzanich planned and then canceled a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump.Stacy J. Smith, the executive vice president who oversees manufacturing and sales, said Intel considered itself apolitical. “Intel engages, whatever the administration,” he said in an interview after Wednesday’s announcement. “We focus on the issues that we care about.”
                A look at the companies that changed plans, announced new ones or stood their ground after catching the president’s attention.            Intel said it agreed with Mr. Trump’s desire to improve the investment climate for American manufacturers. “In places where we believe the policies are in the best interest of the company, we lean in,” Mr. Smith said.In other areas, such as Mr. Trump’s desire to curb immigration and end free-trade agreements, Intel disagrees, and it is telling the White House so. “We care about hiring the best and brightest people around the world,” Mr. Smith said. “We care about exporting our products all over the world.”Mr. Krzanich said in a message to employees that he had chosen to announce the expansion at the White House to signal his support for the administration’s efforts to make American manufacturing more competitive.“When we disagree, we don’t walk away,” he wrote. “We believe that we must be part of the conversation to voice our views on key issues such as immigration, H1B visas and other policies that are essential to innovation.”Intel’s strategy of engagement mirrors that of Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, who serves on a presidential advisory council. Other Silicon Valley leaders, such as Travis Kalanick of Uber, have distanced themselves from the administration under pressure from employees and customers.AdvertisementIntel’s political action committee gave about equally to Democratic and Republican candidates during the last election cycle. Individual employees donated far more to Hillary Clinton’s campaign than to Mr. Trump’s. But over all, the company is not a major political donor.New chip plants are tremendously expensive, requiring large tracts of land, reliable electricity and water, and a skilled work force that includes people with doctorates in chemistry and technicians who can repair a malfunctioning robot. Sophisticated equipment is necessary to deposit and etch microscopic layers of material on silicon wafers, which are then cut and packaged into the microprocessors that run personal computers, servers, smartphones and, increasingly, other electronic devices.Countries compete to land such plants, especially modern factories that produce the most valuable chips and bring high-paying research and development jobs. Government subsidies are common, with China vowing to spend tens of billions of dollars to expand its domestic chip industry.While most technology manufacturing, such as computers and smartphones, has moved overseas, American factories still account for about one-seventh of global chip production and produce many of the most valuable computer chips, including Intel’s flagship processors. Seventy-six chip plants are scattered across the United States, from South Portland, Me., to Newport Beach, Calif., according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.The industry is seeking corporate tax cuts and incentives for research and development. In addition, chip makers would like to see the United States government relax longstanding national security restrictions on the export of new chip technology. In Intel’s case, the regulations forbid the company from making its high-end processors in China.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Smith said Mr. Trump had offered Intel no financial incentives to complete the Arizona factory.The plant was conceived in 2011. President Barack Obama visited the site in 2012, when construction had just begun, and he praised the plant as an example of “an America where we build stuff and make stuff and sell stuff all over the world.”But it was mothballed in 2014 after sales of personal computers — and the Intel chips that go into them — started to slide. Intel restructured its business and announced last year that it was laying off 12,000 people, including 560 in Chandler. The company now employs about 50,000 people in the United States and 106,000 worldwide.As Intel looks beyond servers and personal computers to new markets like other Internet-connected devices, cars and tablets, sales are growing again, and it will need the new factory when it is completed in a couple of years. “We’re building it for our own business reasons,” Mr. Smith said.The plant will build ultradense chips that Intel refers to as seven nanometer, with transistors packed more closely together than in the chips the company now builds. The tighter spacing allows for faster, more energy-efficient chips. “This factory will produce the most powerful computer chips on the planet,” Mr. Krzanich said.Intel, one of the original chip companies, from which Silicon Valley gets its name, is based in Santa Clara, Calif. But most of its chip production is in Oregon and Arizona. It also has factories in China, Ireland and Israel.An earlier version of a photo caption with this article misstated the year that an Intel factory was under construction. It was 2012, not 2002.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Showing Support for Trump, Intel Announces Plant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.Go to Home Page »
Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementFollow Us:Get the Upshot in your Inbox


Binyamin Appelbaum



@BCAppelbaum

DEC. 20, 2016
John Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, said his meetings with business leaders in recent weeks had been dominated by uncertainty about the economic plans of President-elect Donald J. Trump.Trade with China and immigration from Mexico have been huge drivers of economic growth in the western United States. Excitement about tax cuts and regulatory relief has been tempered by worries about the impact of less trade and less immigration.In an interview on Friday, Mr. Williams described what he has been hearing. He also talked about the postelection shift in his own economic outlook, and what he has learned about the health of the American economy over the last 12 months.His comments have been lightly edited for clarity and brevity.Republicans are talking about tax cuts that could provide a jolt of fiscal stimulus. Did that play a role in the decision to raise rates in December?AdvertisementI’m going to give you my own views on that. The unemployment rate has fallen to well below 5 percent, core inflation has been edging up over the last year or so, and other signs of good momentum, such as job growth, made a very convincing case to make this small step at this time. While there are a lot of tensions around fiscal policy and those developments, in my view this decision stands on its own. From my perspective, my support for the rate increase was based wholly on the data we have seen and the basic economic outlook over the next couple of years.AdvertisementBut surely the pace of future rate hikes will depend in part on fiscal policy?The thing about conducting monetary policy in this time, it’s really important to reiterate that we’re focused on our maximum employment and price stability goals. There are decisions that are made by the elected representatives in Congress and the administration, and that’s the process that should happen. What we need to do and what we will do is focus on any changes in the economic outlook, what does that mean for achieving our goals and for the right path of policy decisions to achieve those goals. I know everyone likes to talk about fiscal policy in terms of what does it mean for the outlook. In the last couple of years we’ve also had some big shocks to the economy that came from across the globe. There’s a lot of things that can change and we have to stay focused on our goals and continue to be data dependent in terms of analyzing what do these changes mean for our outlook.The Fed’s baseline for next year is three rate increases. Is that your view?I will say that my underlying view for next year is broadly consistent with the central tendency of the committee. My view is that the economy is going to grow roughly as it did this year, unemployment is going to edge down a little bit, inflation moving back to 2 percent, and that calls for gradual removal of policy accommodation.So Mr. Trump’s election hasn’t had a big impact on your economic outlook?Obviously I don’t have any particular insights into what the new Congress or the new administration is going to do around fiscal policy. There’s a lot of uncertainty about what policies are going to be enacted, and that matters a lot in terms of thinking about any effects on the economy. I do think, even though I’m definitely “wait and see” in terms of learning what happens, the main effect on my outlook is that my view on the risks to the outlook have shifted a little. Those risks used to be maybe balanced and if anything a little bit to the soft side because of global developments and other factors that might cause growth to weaken. And I think that the possibility of greater fiscal stimulus and other changes in policies would if anything move those risks a little bit to the right. But it’s not a big effect.If the economy is now growing at something close to its sustainable potential, what good can come of fiscal stimulus?Changes in fiscal or other policies that can increase potential output of the economy or the growth rate of the economy in terms of the supply side obviously would be beneficial in terms of the low equilibrium interest rate. The kind of things I’m thinking about are policies that lead to increased investment, whether it’s public investment in infrastructure or productivity: enhancing business investment around research and development or just general expansion of investment in plants and facilities and things like that. We’re trying to have a game changer around longer-term growth prospects and boost the long-run strength of the economy. And it’s really going to have to come through things that either increase the productivity of the economy or on the other side improve and increase the labor force and give education or job training, improving the productivity of our work force. Those are the things that really matter for the long run.Is there any value in deficit spending just to stimulate growth?Any discussion around federal fiscal policy has to — at this juncture, given that the economy is near full employment and it’s in pretty good shape in terms of the business cycle — it should be focused on improving the longer-run performance of the economy. I think that’s beneficial to everybody in our society. The other issue that’s obviously important is that you want to have a federal budget that’s sustainable in the long run. So when thinking about fiscal policies, I would really think the key issue is, “What are policies that would improve the long-run performance of our economy and make our economy stronger in the longer run and put the federal budget on a sustainable long-run path?” So hopefully that’s the direction that things will go.In an essay this summer, you argued that the Fed should be preparing for future crises. You suggested in particular that the Fed should consider targeting a higher inflation rate. Is that discussion happening?AdvertisementThere is definitely work going on in the economics community around these topics, among a lot of academics but also among central banks. Particular kudos to the Bank of Canada, who, through a process that the bank has with the government — every five years they review their framework for monetary policy – they have a very serious deep dive and thoughtful consideration of these issues. I think of them as conducting best practice in terms of the willingness to consider these issues and to think long term and to do it in a very open-minded way. So I think other central banks should follow the Bank of Canada’s lead here.I think the important thing to remember on this is that this is not an issue about the U.S. or Canada. It’s an issue that according to our research and an increasing number of researchers, this observation that the equilibrium interest rate appears to be at very low level and is likely to stay that way for a long time is more of a global phenomenon. The one piece of advice I give on this is: Stop thinking about this as a national issue. It’s really a global phenomenon driven by demographic trends and what economists call the global savings glut or heightened demand for safe assets. I think people around the world are starting to focus on this. The question of what’s the right remedy, that’s kind of the later discussion.If it’s a global issue, does it require a coordinated response?If people came to the conclusion that given the equilibrium real rate [inflation targets should be increased], I do think there would be advantages: that the more countries that raised their target at the same time, I think the greater the benefit is. If you look at some of the research that’s going on, I think one of the most interesting and important conclusions from that is that the negative spillovers from other parts of the world, if they go into recession and hit the zero lower bound, and monetary policy cannot be fully effective in bringing their economies back to full strength, the negative spillover is greater if the rest of the world is also getting pushed down to the zero lower bound. When everybody is at the zero lower bound and they’re all being constrained, there’s a negative feedback loop. Weakness abroad spills over to the United States and then we can’t offset that as effectively. If we had a higher inflation target and didn’t come to the zero lower bound, we’d be free to adjust our policy to offset any effects coming from abroad, and that has a positive influence on the global economy. And with a very low inflation target around the world, the likelihood of all of us hitting the zero lower bound is higher. And if everyone had a higher inflation target — a modestly higher target, a 3 or 4 percent target — then the likelihood of all us getting to the zero lower bound at the same time is much lower. My punch line is: Yes, countries can do it one by one. That would work. We’ve seen it happen. But I do think there are some benefits to a more, I wouldn’t say coordinated, but perhaps a more correlated approach.You mentioned the Bank of Canada’s accounting every five years. There are proposals before Congress to increase the Fed’s accountability. Do you think there are versions of that idea that would be desirable?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To my mind the most important feature of what the Federal Reserve operates under is the ability to act independently of short-term political influence. To me that’s the bedrock of any discussion of reforms around the Federal Reserve. Research has shown that independent central banks can work more effectively at keeping inflation low and stable and keeping economies performing up to their potential, and that’s a critical piece of any Fed reform. It’s essential that we retain the ability to make what can be politically unpopular decisions in the interest of the economy. That’s the way the Federal Reserve was constructed, and various reforms have maintained and strengthened that so we can focus on our dual mandate goals.The specific proposals that would require a policy rule would be problematic in the real world. I’m a big advocate of having systematic predictable monetary policy. I agree with all of those principles, I just know from practice that given the uncertainties around potential output and employment – all of those aspects of actual decision-making means that trying to tie the hands of a central bank to some simple equations is misguided. I think rules are important inputs into policy making. I think we should make that clear. But it’s not a substitute for careful analysis and judgment around decision-making.The other point I’d make that doesn’t get enough attention is that these efforts to tie the Fed’s hands seems to be completely at odds with the structure of the Federal Reserve in having a committee of presidents from around the U.S. together with governors, having a group of people with different perspectives and backgrounds and different understandings of how monetary policy works. That whole structure is designed to get away from groupthink and it’s designed to show that we don’t all agree and highlight different views.But are there steps you think the Fed should take?Obviously I believe strongly in transparency at the Federal Reserve in terms of our strategy or our policies. We’ve moved dramatically toward more transparency in the 20 years I’ve been at the Fed. I think those are all positive things and I’m a supporter of any efforts we can do to be more transparent around our thinking around policy decisions within that rubric of being independent of short-term political pressure.I do think that there’s analysis that we go through in preparing for Federal Open Market Committee meetings that does not necessarily tell us what we’re going to choose to do but definitely are inputs into our policy process that we could be more open about. The specific example is that we do look at policy rules and optimal control policies of the kind that [Janet] Yellen has highlighted in her speeches over the last several years. It’s not a substitute for decision-making. It’s an input. And we could do a better job and be more willing to put that out there in different ways to help people understand better, in a very practical way, here’s the kind of analysis that goes into the decisions. I always find that Chair Yellen is really good at this. She says, “Here are the issues; here are the caveats.” I read her speeches and think could we make this more of a regular feature of our communications. Whether it’s in the monetary policy report or in some other way. She’s shown us the way of how to explain it and put it out there, nicely framed, not telling you what we’re going to do but how I think about these issues. So I think there’s a path forward around providing more information about the various scenarios and getting that information out there more publicly.AdvertisementOur monetary policy report [sent to Congress twice a year] as currently constituted doesn’t really provide this kind of information – the analysis around monetary policy – the stuff that you see around monetary policy reports at the Bank of England or the Riksbank. You look at those other reports and you’re saying, these are quite amazing documents in terms of how much content they put into those. Our report, I don’t think we’re anywhere near best practice in terms of having that kind of report. That’s a big undertaking and a lot of work, but that’s again what I look at – is there a way even with our structure to come up with a monetary policy report that would give that depth to the analysis. We hide from the public how much work and thought goes into these, how much assessment of risks to the outlook in policy decisions, how much thinking goes into that.Have you been surprised by the strength of job growth? Was there more room for the economy to improve than you expected?Labor force participation has held up a little better than we had thought. And we’ve got a lot more research on this, in the context of “Hey, maybe we were missing something.” One approach is to say, let’s just treat everybody in the population as potentially in the labor force. Everyone over 16, let’s look at that whole pool and construct a nonemployment index and for each group — a person in school, a person who’s in retirement — you ask statistically, what’s the percentage of those people who get a job in the next month? The punch line is when you look at this broader statistic, that number is basically consistent with an unemployment rate below 5 percent and it’s very similar to the figure you get in 2005, when the economy was at full employment. What that tells me is whatever has been happening over the last year, where we are today is essentially consistent with being at full employment.That does leave the huge question: If we really are at trend, why is participation so much lower than it was 10 years ago? And that’s something economists have really turned their energy to understand: Why today the normal is so much different?Trade with China, and immigration from Mexico, have been huge drivers of economic growth in your district. Are you concerned about the potential impact of Mr. Trump’s plans to limit both?We’ve been collecting a lot of perspectives from business leaders and community leaders in our district. And it was fascinating to me. It was one of the most interesting conversations I’ve had. First of all, everybody who came to these meetings, that’s what they were thinking about. Obviously there are people very excited about perhaps a little more business-friendly regulation. A lot of people are excited about lower corporate taxes. But it was striking because in that same conversation where people said I’m bullish on this or cautiously optimistic on that, it was striking how much concern business leaders in my district expressed around immigration and trade. Obviously trade is a big deal here on the West Coast. Our industries are very export-oriented. That was an area where there is uncertainty around where that would go, not as a political statement, just “How would this affect us?” given how many industries and jobs are really tied to a global economy.In terms of the agriculture industry, which is still a big part of the Western economy, clearly issues around labor availability came up quite a bit. That’s tied to immigration, but it’s also tied to concerns about our education system and making sure that if we’re going to restrict the availability of labor into our market one way or the other, we’re going to need to train and prepare our work force for the jobs that we need to fill.Similarly you heard comments in tech about H1B visas. Nobody knows what’s going to happen but this is a region of the economy that really has been built over a very long period of time around global trade, around openness, around bringing in the best talent from around the world into the technology world, superlative universities that attract people who come here and end up staying here. What I heard a lot of was more about the uncertainty of this, and people saying in the end this either means more mechanization if we don’t have labor available, to have this done even more by machines.And then in the tech world and quite honestly entertainment too we know that this is a very fungible industry. If it’s hard to get the labor to come here, you’ll have to have your offices, your research-and-development shops and other things where the labor can be. There’s always a discussion around Canada being very open to having tech centers open up where they do research and do other things. It’s not a political thing. It’s more about the uncertainty.The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementBy JEREMY W. PETERS and MAGGIE HABERMANFEB. 3, 2016
Ted Cruz sounded despondent at the possibility that same-sex marriage could become legal when he called into the radio show of Tony Perkins, a vehement opponent of gay rights, in February 2014. “Our heart weeps for the damage to traditional marriage that has been done,” Mr. Cruz said, urging conservatives to pray but also to fight back. “Be as wise as serpents and gentle as doves,” he said, quoting Scripture.But seven months later, when Mr. Cruz visited the Midtown Manhattan office of a major Republican supporter of same-sex marriage, he sounded almost indifferent: If New York politicians wanted to legalize it, that was their business, he told Paul Singer, the billionaire investor who had bankrolled efforts to strike down laws forbidding same-sex marriage across the country. There was no reason the issue had to drive a wedge between the two men, the Texas senator said, according to a person briefed on the meeting who supports one of Mr. Cruz’s opponents. (Mr. Singer went on to endorse Senator Marco Rubio of Florida a year later.)Mr. Cruz would hardly be the only person to modulate his most provocative language when speaking to people whose support he is courting. But Mr. Cruz, the winner of the Iowa caucuses, has worked harder than any Republican running for president to portray himself as the true and pure conservative and to impugn his rivals as not faithful enough in their conservatism.Now, as he finds himself locked in an intense struggle for the support of the party’s top donors, instances in which he curried favor, or merely associated, with people who do not share his views on some contentious issues are being dredged up and shared by people who believe that Mr. Cruz has been disingenuous, especially in his solicitation of money from people he has coolly dismissed as having “New York values.”AdvertisementIn interviews, donors and activists do not suggest that Mr. Cruz has contradicted himself. But they say that, in contrast to his aggressive public persona, he places a distinctly softer emphasis on some of his most stridently conservative views when privately addressing people who might find them offensive.AdvertisementOn immigration, for example, Mr. Cruz has come under fire for reversing himself on expanding the H1B visa pool for highly skilled workers, a program viewed skeptically by conservatives. He now opposes it, citing abuses of the program. But in advocating for the program in 2013, he sought support not just from policy experts but from donors with an interest in the subject.That June, Mr. Cruz’s spokesman, Sean Rushton, wrote to an aide to Joe Lonsdale, a venture investor, attaching a draft op-ed by Mr. Cruz explaining his support for an increase in the visas, which was favored by many in the tech industry, including Mr. Lonsdale. The email invited Mr. Lonsdale to propose edits to the article if he saw fit. (The op-ed does not appear to have run.)Mr. Cruz’s spokesman, Rick Tyler, said his positions were consistent, adding, “We give donors an opportunity to sign on with Cruz, not the other way around.”In interviews, people who have seen Mr. Cruz speak privately said he was able to switch back and forth with ease between his crusading public persona and a softer and less confrontational tone.Mr. Perkins, the evangelical leader, who endorsed Mr. Cruz this week, said that there was nothing unusual about this. “You find a point of commonality,” he said. “That doesn’t mean you’re not for the other issues.” Mr. Cruz, he added, was sincere in his beliefs. “I’ve never seen him speak out of both sides of his mouth.”Robert O’Brien, a Los Angeles lawyer who supported Mitt Romney in 2012 and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin before he dropped out, gathered more than a dozen former Romney supporters to meet Mr. Cruz in December 2014. “I found his positions to be solid conservative Ronald Reagan-type positions,” said Mr. O’Brien, saying Mr. Cruz, whom he found charming, focused primarily on national security. “I didn’t find them to be kind of the caricature that came out of him in the Senate,” he said. But he said he did not hear any contradictions with Mr. Cruz’s public pronouncements.Despite his public denunciations of political opponents and firebrand views on social issues, Mr. Cruz has a long history with some of the party’s prominent donors who hold more liberal views on social issues.AdvertisementIn his 30s, when he was a lawyer mulling his next move, Mr. Cruz sought out wealthy financiers who were major benefactors to gay-rights causes. His campaign for Texas attorney general in 2009 was aided with $250,000 from Peter Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal, and he persuaded Mr. Singer to donate $25,000. (Mr. Cruz withdrew when his boss at the time, Attorney General Greg Abbott, sought re-election.)Watch “The Contenders,” a new virtual reality film about the 2016 race, in NYTVRWatch “The Contenders,” a new virtual reality film about the 2016 race, in  NYTVR,
          our virtual reality app for iPhone and Android.
Mr. Cruz continues to rely on Mr. Thiel’s generosity and describes the venture capitalist, who is gay, as a close friend. He has been a guest at two lavish conferences Mr. Thiel hosts for up-and-coming conservative leaders, one in Miami Beach at the Setai, where rooms top $1,000 per night, in 2008, and another at the Reynolds Plantation in Georgia in 2009.A person who attended the Miami Beach gathering described the retreats as brainstorming sessions on the future of the American right involving people who were more centrist-minded than fire-breathing conservatives.Attendees included young Republicans who were considered rising stars at the time, including Eric Cantor, who would become House majority leader, and Aaron Schock, the former Illinois congressman who would later resign amid revelations of campaign finance impropriety.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Thiel was also a major supporter of Mr. Cruz’s 2012 Senate campaign, giving $2 million to the Club for Growth, which in turn spent heavily on Mr. Cruz’s behalf. And Mr. Cruz invoked their friendship at a fund-raiser last April at the home of two hoteliers whose properties cater to a gay clientele.Mr. Thiel and Mr. Singer have both supported efforts to legalize same-sex marriage for the better part of the last decade.Mr. Cruz first wooed Mr. Singer in March 2009, according to a person who reviewed Mr. Singer’s calendar but insisted on anonymity to disclose details from it. Over the next five years, Mr. Cruz requested at least eight more meetings with Mr. Singer in his Manhattan office, and got four.In 2012, Mr. Singer donated $100,000 to a group that helped elect Mr. Cruz to the Senate. But he was turned off by what he thought was Mr. Cruz’s futile and harmful efforts that shut down the government in 2013 in protest of the Affordable Care Act.They differed most noticeably, however, on gay rights. Mr. Singer has often urged Republicans to adopt a more inclusive tone. But shortly after the Supreme Court ruling last summer that legalized same-sex marriage, Mr. Cruz told an audience of conservatives the decision was “one of the greatest threats to our democracy we have seen in modern times.”Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Cruz, a Public Firebrand on Social Issues, Is Cooler When Wooing Big Donors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementMARCH 11, 2016
Following is a transcript of the Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.TAPPER: Live from the Bank United Center on the campus of the University of Miami, this is the CNN Republican Presidential debate. For our viewers in the United States and around the world, welcome to Miami Florida, I’m Jake Tapper.TAPPER: In just five days voters will go to the polls here in this state as well as in Ohio, Illinois, North Carolina and Missouri. The race for the Republican nomination for president could change dramatically. Florida and Ohio each have a large number of delegates at stake and they award all of them to the candidate who wins. They’re a winner-take-all state. So that’s the first time that will happen in this primary season and this is the last debate before that critical round of voting. We hope tonight the candidates will give the voters specifics on their visions for America. So now let’s welcome the candidates. Ohio Governor John Kasich. (APPLAUSE) Senator Ted Cruz of Texas. (APPLAUSE) Real estate developer and businessman Donald Trump. (APPLAUSE) Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. (APPLAUSE) Ladies and gentlemen, the Republican candidates for president of the United States. (APPLAUSE) Before we begin this evening, we want to remember former first lady Nancy Reagan, who passed away this week. Her funeral will be held tomorrow and we would like to take a moment of silence to remember Nancy Reagan. (MOMENT OF SILENCE) Now, please rise for our national anthem performed by the Frost Singers from the University of Miami. (STAR SPANGLED BANNER) (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thanks to the Frost Singers from the University of Miami. Candidates, you can now take your positions behind the podiums while I briefly explain the rules. As moderator, I will attempt to guide the discussion, asking questions and followups. Joining me in the questioning this evening will be Washington Times reporter Stephen Dinan, CNN Chief Political Correspondent Dana Bash, and Salem Radio’s Hugh Hewitt. Candidates, you have one minute and 15 seconds to answer each question, and 45 seconds to respond to followups or for rebuttals if your name is invoked. That’s longer than you’ve had in previous debates. Timing lights will be visible. Those lights will warn you when time is up. And as you requested, a bell will also sound, like this. (BELL SOUND) We know that each of you wants to debate these important issues, but please wait until you are called upon and please do not talk over one another. These are the rules to which all of you agreed. Our goal this evening is a serious debate on the issues. It’s time now for opening statements. You’ll each have 30 seconds. Governor Kasich, we will start with you.KASICH: Well, thank you. You know, I look in the faces of people all across this country, and I know they want to be hopeful. And many are hopeful. Look, I can take conservative policies to the White House, to Washington, to restore the strength of our economy. But I also want to transfer power, money and influence to where you live, because I believe the strength in this country rests in the neighborhoods, the families, the communities and our states. And I believe it’s a new partnership — a partnership that can allow us to restore the spirit of America and strengthen America for the best century we’ve ever had. Thank you. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementTAPPER: Senator Rubio?RUBIO: Every election is important. I believe this is the most important election in a generation. Because what’s at stake in this election is not simply what party is going to be in charge or which candidate wins. What’s at stake is our identity as a nation and as a people.RUBIO: For over two centuries, America has been an exceptional nation. And now the time has come for this generation to do what it must do to keep it that way. If we make the right choice in this election, our children are going to be the freest and most prosperous Americans that have ever lived. And the 21st century is going to be a new American century. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementTAPPER: Senator Cruz?CRUZ: Fifty-nine years ago, Florida welcomed my father to America as he stepped off the ferry boat from Cuba onto Key West. He was 18. He was filled with hopes and dreams, and yet he was in the freest land on the face of the earth. This election, this debate is not about insults. It’s not about attacks. It’s not about any of the individuals on this stage. This election is about you and your children. It’s about the freedom America has always had and making sure that that freedom is there for the next generation, that we stop Washington from standing in the way of the hard-working taxpayers of America. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Mr. Trump?TRUMP: One of the biggest political events anywhere in the world is happening right now with the Republican Party. Millions and millions of people are going out to the polls and they’re voting. They’re voting out of enthusiasm. They’re voting out of love. Some of these people, frankly, have never voted before — 50 years old, 60 years old, 70 years old — never voted before. We’re taking people from the Democrat Party. We’re taking people as independents, and they’re all coming out and the whole world is talking about it. It’s very exciting. I think, frankly, the Republican establishment, or whatever you want to call it, should embrace what’s happening. We’re having millions of extra people join. We are going to beat the Democrats. We are going to beat Hillary or whoever it may be. And we’re going to beat them soundly. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you. Thank you. Let’s begin with jobs and the economy, which Republican voters say is the most important issue to them in this election. There have been some real differences expressed in — on this stage on whether trade deals have been good for the American workers. One of Mr. Trump’s, the front runner’s, signature issues is ending what he calls “disastrous trade deals” in order to bring jobs back to America. Governor Kasich, I’d like to start with you. You’ve been a strong advocate for these trade deals over the years. Critics say these deals are great for corporate America’s bottom line, but have cost the U.S. at least 1 million jobs. How do you respond to the criticism that you’ve been catering to board rooms at the expense of the American middle class?KASICH: Well, Jake, I grew up in a blue collar family. And the simple fact of the matter is that of course we’re sensitive about trade. One out of five Americans works in a job connected to trade; 38 million Americans are connected to it. But my position has always been we want to have free trade, but fair trade. And I’ve been arguing all along that it is absolutely critical that when other countries break those agreements, we don’t turn the process over to some international bureaucrat who comes back a couple years later and says, “Oh, America was right,” and people are out of work. The fact of the matter is we have to have an expedited process. When people cheat, when countries cheat and they take advantage of us, we need to blow the whistle. And as president of the United States, I absolutely will blow the whistle and begin to stand up for the American worker. But we don’t want to lock the doors and pull down the blinds and leave the world. Because frankly, if we do that, prices will go up. People will buy less. Other people will be out of work. And we don’t want to see that happen. Trade, though, has to be balanced and we have to make sure that when we see a violation, like some country dumping their products into this country, believe me as president, I will stand up and I will shut down those imports because they’re a violation of the agreement we have and the American worker expects us to stand up. And Jake, my family worked in the steel industry, not with a white collar. I understand their plight. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Mr. Trump, your critics say your campaign platform is inconsistent with how you run your businesses, noting that you’ve brought in foreign workers instead of hiring Americans, and your companies manufacture clothing in China and Mexico. Why should voters trust that you will run the country differently from how you run your businesses? TRUMP: Because nobody knows the system better than me. I know the H1B. I know the H2B. Nobody knows it better than me. I’m a businessman. These are laws. These are regulations. These are rules. We’re allowed to do it. And frankly, because of the devaluations that other countries — the monetary devaluations that other countries are constantly doing and brilliantly doing against us, it’s very, very hard for our companies in this country, in our country, to compete. So I will take advantage of it; they’re the laws. But I’m the one that knows how to change it. Nobody else on this dais knows how to change it like I do, believe me.TAPPER: Senator Rubio, last October, you said that you’re, quote, “generally very much in favor of free trade.” More recently, you backed a away from your support of some trade deals. If elected, will you support free trade deals even if it means the inevitable loss of U.S. jobs?RUBIO: No, I support free trade deals that are good for America. We’re 5 percent of the world’s population. If all we do is sell things to each other, we can only sell to 5 percent of the people on earth. We have to have access to the hundreds of millions of people in the world today who can afford to buy things. The problem is we’re a low-tariff country. To import something into the United States is not very expensive, but many of these countries we can’t export to because their tariffs are too high. And so I am in favor of deals that allow us to bring down those tariffs so that America can sell things to all these people around the world. There are good trade deals and there are bad ones. So for example, here in Florida, we have benefited from the free trade deal with Colombia. It’s allowed flower exporters to come into the United States but it’s created jobs for hundreds of people who are now delivering those flowers and working in that industry. We have a surplus with Colombia. On the other hand, you’ve seen trade deals like in Mexico that have been less than promising in some aspects, better in others. Bottom line is I believe that America, if given access to foreign markets, our workers are the most productive in the world, our people are the most innovative on this planet. If it is a free and fair trade deal, we can compete against anyone in the world, and we need to in the 21st century. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementTAPPER: Senator Cruz, you were a supporter of the Pacific trade deal, but after taking some heat from conservatives, you changed your position. Why should these voters who don’t like these trade deals trust that you will fight for them all the time and not just in election years?CRUZ: Actually that’s incorrect. There are two different agreements. There’s TPA and TPP. I opposed TPP and have always opposed TPP, which is what you asked about. And when it comes to trade, look, free trade, when we open up foreign markets, helps Americans. But we’re getting killed in international trade right now. And we’re getting killed because we have an administration that’s doesn’t look out for American workers and jobs are going overseas. We’re driving jobs overseas. And the people who are losing out are in manufacturing jobs, or the steel industry or the auto industry. But I’ll tell you who else is going to be losing out, which is the service industry. This Obama administration is negotiating the Trade in Services Agreement which is another treaty to allow services to come in and take jobs from Americans as well. And you’ve got to understand. Trade and immigration are interwoven, and they are hurting the working men and women of this country. So the question is, what’s the solution? It’s easy to talk about the problems. But do you have a solution to fix it? And I think the solution is several things. Number one, we need to negotiate trade deals protecting American workers first, not the corporate board room. Number two, we need to lift the regulations on American businesses here so we see jobs coming back. And number three, we need a tax plan like the tax plan I’ve introduced that will not tax exports and that will tax imports, and that will bring millions of high-paying jobs back to America. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Let’s talk more about how American jobs are impacted by foreign workers. Let’s go to Stephen Dinan of the Washington Times. Stephen.DINAN: Senator Rubio in late 2014, Disney laid off 250 tech workers in Orlando, replacing many of them with foreign workers. Some of the Americans even had to train their own replacements. You support increasing the H-1B visa program that made it possible to bring in these foreign workers. Doesn’t this program take jobs away from Americans?RUBIO: If it’s being abused the way Disney did. Understand that program, it is illegal now under that program to use it to replace American workers. Under that program, you have to prove not only that you’re not replacing Americans, but that you’ve tried to hire Americans. And if a company is caught abusing that process, they should never be allowed to use it again. The second problem with the current structure of the program that people perhaps don’t understand is a lot of these companies are not directly hiring employees from abroad. They are hiring a consulting company like Tata, for example, out of India. That company then hoards up all of these visas. They hire workers. You hire — Disney or some other company hires this company. What they’re basically doing is they are insourcing and outsourcing. They are bringing in workers from abroad that are not direct employees of a Disney or someone else, they’re employees of this consulting business. And what I argue is that no consulting business such as that should be allowed to hoard up all of these visas, that the visas should only be available for companies to use to directly hire workers and that we should be stricter in how he enforce it. It is illegal now, it is a violation of the law now to use that program to replace Americans. And if a company is caught doing that, whether it be Disney or anyone else, they should be barred from using the program in the future.DINAN: Senator Rubio, real quick follow-up on this. (APPLAUSE) You’ve — in the — in the context of illegal immigration, you’ve called for basically putting off any legalization process until we get the border secured.RUBIO: Correct.DINAN: Why not call for a pause on H1Bs until those abuses you’ve talked about are solved.RUBIO: Well first, I think — well, I’d be open to it if it takes a pause. But I don’t think it takes a pause to enforce the law. What they are doing is they are in fact using that program to replace an American. If there’s an American working at Disney and they bring someone from another country using H1B to replace their direct job, that’s in violation of the law. And what I’m explaining to you is, what they are doing now is they are not — what they are doing is they are eliminating the job. They are outsourcing the entire tech division to a consulting company. They are making the argument that we didn’t replace you. We just replaced the whole unit by hiring a company to do it instead. And that company that they’re hiring is bringing their workers from abroad. It’s a loophole they’ve figured out that we need to close so they can no longer continue to do it that way. (APPLAUSE)DINAN: Governor Kasich, I want to come to you next. Mr. Trump says that legal immigration is producing quote, “lower wages and higher unemployment for U.S. workers”. He’s calling for a pause on green cards issued to foreign workers. Wouldn’t that help workers in the U.S.?AdvertisementKAISCH: Well look, I believe in immigration, but it has to be controlled. The simple fact of the matter is I wouldn’t be standing here. I’d be maybe running for president of Croatia if we didn’t have immigration. Immigration is something that brings youth and vibrance and energy to our country. But we clearly have to control our borders. We can’t have people just walking in. Look, we lock our doors at night in our homes. The country has to be able to lock its doors as well. So, we — I have a comprehensive plan to deal with this problem of immigration. I would say we have to absolutely finish the wall and guard the border. And if anybody were to come in after that, they are going to have to go back. No excuses because we can’t continue this problem. I think we ought to have a guest worker program, where people come in, work and go home. And I think at the same time, for the 11 and a half million who are here, then in my view if they have not committed a crime since they’ve been here, they get a path to legalization. Not to citizenship. I believe that program can pass the Congress in the first 100 days. But let’s not lose sight of the fact that the whole key to the future of America is strong economic growth with common sense regulation, lower taxes and a balanced budget. We can have a rising tide that lifts all the workers in America, all the people who are citizens of America, if we’ll just follow the formula that works, that I used in Washington. And guess what, I’ve used it in Ohio to grow over 400 private sector jobs since I’ve been governorDINAN: Mr. Trump, I do want to come to you. Will you also in your answer, address how long you think that pause would be and what that pause would look like.TRUMP: I will. First of all, I think and I know the H1B very well. And it’s something that I frankly use and I shouldn’t be allowed to use it. We shouldn’t have it. Very, very bad for workers. And second of all, I think it’s very important to say, well, I’m a businessman and I have to do what I have to do. When it’s sitting there waiting for you, but it’s very bad. It’s very bad for business in terms of — and it’s very bad for our workers and it’s unfair for our workers. And we should end it. Very importantly, the Disney workers endorsed me, as you probably read. And I got a full endorsement because they are the ones that said, and they had a news conference, and they said, he’s the only one that’s going to be able to fix it. Because it is a mess. I think for a period of a year to two years we have to look back and we have to see, just to answer the second part of your question, where we are, where we stand, what’s going on. We have to sort of take a strong, good, hard look and come up with plans that work. And we’re rushing into things, and we’re just — we’re leading with the chin. (BELL RINGS) We’re leading with people that don’t know what they are doing in terms of our leadership. I’d say a minimum of one year, maybe two years.DINAN: Senator Cruz, I want to bring you in very quickly on this. (APPLAUSE)DINAN: The United States averages about a million new permanent legal immigrants a year and hundreds of thousands more guest workers. What should the right level be?CRUZ: Well, we need to redefine our legal immigration system so that it meets the needs of the American economy. Right now, we’re bringing in far too many low skilled workers. What that is doing is driving down the wages of hard-working Americans. Our system isn’t working. And then on top of that, we’ve got a system that’s allowing in millions of people to be here illegally. And the answer to that, I’ve laid out a very, very detailed immigration plan on my website. We’re going to build a wall, triple the border patrol. We’re going to end sanctuary cities. And let me tell you how we’re going to do that. We’re going to cut off federal taxpayer funds to any city that defies federal immigration laws. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: We’re going to end welfare benefits for anyone who is here illegally. And the thing to understand, Stephen, we can solve these problems. It’s not that we don’t know how to do it. It’s that we’re lacking the political will. Neither of the parties in Washington wants to do this. The Democrats support illegal immigration because they view those illegal immigrants as potential voters and far too many of the Republicans are doing the bidding of Wall Street and the special interest and they view it as cheap labor.CRUZ: We need instead leadership that works for the working men and women of this country. We need an immigration system that takes care of the jobs of the working men and women of this country. (APPLAUSE)
                The New York Times will be checking assertions made throughout the 2016 presidential campaign.            TAPPER: Senator Rubio, did you want to weigh in?RUBIO: Well, I would add when you talk about the millions of green cards that are coming in, those aren’t actually workers at all. They are just coming in primarily based on family connection. And ;let me tell you, when my parents came in 1956, I acknowledge that my parents came to the U.S. on a family-based system. The problem is nothing looks like it did 60 years ago. The 21st Century economy simply is not creating enough jobs for people that don’t have skills. When my parents came, they had a very limited education. My father stopped going to school when he was 9 years old because his mother died and he had to work. And he would work the next 70 years of his life and never go back to school. And I’m grateful every day that America welcomed them. But today in the 21st Century, 60 years later, finding jobs when you don’t have skills is very difficult. We need to move to a merit- based system of immigration, not just on H-1B, particularly on green cards. The primary criteria for bringing someone from abroad in the 21st Century should be, what skills do you have? What business are you going to open? What investment are you going to make? What job are you going to be able to do when you arrive in the United States? (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementTAPPER: Education obviously plays a large role when it comes to jobs and the economy. The United States has long been falling behind others in the industrialized world. American students currently rank 27th out of 34 countries in math and 17th in reading. Mr. Trump, you’ve called the education standards known as Common Core a disaster. What are your specific objections to Common Core?TRUMP: Education through Washington, D.C. I don’t want that. I want local education. I want the parents, and I want all of the teachers, and I want everybody to get together around a school and to make education great. And it was very interesting, I was with Dr. Ben Carson today, who is endorsing me, by the way, tomorrow morning, and he is... (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: We were talking. We spoke for over an hour on education. And he has such a great handle on it. He wants competitive schools. He wants a lot of different things that are terrific, including charter schools, by the way, that the unions are fighting like crazy. But charter schools work and they work very well. So there are a lot of things. But I’m going to have Ben very involved with education, something that’s an expertise of his.TAPPER: OK. But just to clarify, the Common Core standards were developed by the states, states and localities voluntarily adopt them, and they come up with their own curricula to meet those standards. So when you say “education by Washington, D.C.,” what do you mean?TRUMP: You’re right, Jake. But it has been taken over by the federal government. It was originally supposed to be that way. And certainly sounds better that way. But it has all been taken over now by the bureaucrats in Washington, and they are not interested in what’s happening in Miami or in Florida, in many cases. Now in some cases they would be. But in many cases they are more interested in their paycheck and the big bureaucracy than they are taking care of the children. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Governor Kasich, you have called opposition to Common Core hysteria. What is your response to grassroots conservatives who do not agree with you?KASICH: Well, look, all I’m in favor of in Ohio is high standards. First of all, let me tell you, I would take 125 federal education programs, put them in four buckets, and send them back to the states. OK, I’ve been working on this for many, many years. Secondly, Jake, in our state, the state school board sets the standards. And we want high standards because we have not always had high standards, unfortunately. They set the standards and the local school boards develop the curriculum. Not only did we have that in the law, we reasserted it in the law. And we also want parental advisers in the local school district so that, in fact, you know, frankly, education has to be run at the school board level with a little guidance from the state. Now on top of that, you want to talk about the 21st Century and what we need to do with our kids? We need to start connecting them to the real world. We need to be training them for the jobs of the 21st Century, not the jobs of 20 years ago. We need vocational education starting in the seventh grade where kids can get that kind of education that can take them to college, but all the way through their K through 12 they ought to be connected with real-world jobs. Frankly, what ought to happen is we ought to get them to pursue their God-given talents and connect them with the things that give them passion. And that’s exactly what we’re doing in Ohio, combined with mentoring programs to talk to kids about what their future can be. So let me be clear, local control, obviously, high state standards. That’s what it is in the state of Ohio. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: So, Senator Cruz, let me bring you in. You object to Common Core. Governor Kasich says it’s local school boards developing local curriculum to meet higher standards. What’s wrong with that?AdvertisementCRUZ: Common Core is a disaster. And if I am elected president, in the first days as president, I will direct the Department of Education that Common Core ends that day. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: Now, let me tell you why you can do that, because it’s easy to talk about the problem, but you have to understand the solutions. The Obama administration has abused executive power in forcing common core on the states. It has used race-to-the-top funds to effectively blackmail and force the states to adopt common core. Now, the one silver lining of Obama abusing executive power is that everything done with executive power can be undone with executive power, and I intend to do that. (APPLAUSE) Beyond that, though, Jake, I intend to work to abolish the federal Department of Education and send education back to the states and back to the local governments. And let me say finally, the most important reform we can do in education after getting the federal government out of it, is expand school choice; expand charter schools and home schools and private schools and vouchers, and scholarships. And give every child — African American, Hispanic — every child in need an opportunity to access to a quality education. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Let’s move on to another topic of particular interest here in Florida. Florida has the highest percentage of seniors in the country. There are 3.1 million senior citizens here who receive Social Security benefits, and they’re very interested in hearing what you candidates intend to do to keep Social Security going for future generations. Let me turn now to my colleague Dana Bash.BASH: Senator Rubio, you argue Americans your age must have an honest conversation about making Social Security sustainable. For people under 55, you want to raise the retirement age and also reduce benefits for wealthier Americans. So, what should the new retirement age be? And how much will those benefits be cut?RUBIO: Well, first of all, let me say that you’re right, there are about 3 million seniors in Florida with Social Security and Medicare. One of them is my mother, who happens to be here today. I’m against any changes to Social Security that are bad for my mother. And we don’t have to make any changes for them. But anyone who tells you that Social Security can stay the way it is is lying. Any politician that goes around saying, “We don’t have to anything; all we have to do is raise a few taxes or just leave it the way it is,” they’re not being honest with you. Social Security will go bankrupt and it will bankrupt the country with it. So what it will require is people younger, like myself, people that are 30 years away from retirement, to accept that our Social Security is going to work differently than it did for my parents. For example, instead of retiring at 67 the way I’m supposed to retire, I’d have to retire at 68. If I were still in the Senate, I’d be one of the youngest people there. (LAUGHTER) If I’ve made a lot of money, my Social Security benefit will not grow as fast as someone who made less money. And by the way, Medicare could very well become the option of using my Medicare benefit to buy a private plan that I like better. Medicare Advantage does that now. These are not unreasonable changes to ask of someone like myself who is 25 or 30 years away from retirement, in exchange for leaving the program undisturbed for the people that are on it now or about to retire, and ensuring that we do not bankrupt our country and that this program still exists when my children retire, when my grandchildren retire, when I retire. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Senator, the question was specific though. You made your plan very clear about generally what you want to do, but how high would the retirement age go and how much would you cut those benefits?RUBIO: Well, I’m sorry I didn’t answer that part. So the thing is that my — my generation, someone my age would retire at 68. We would continue to allow it to increase the retirement age for future generations until it hit 70. And so my children would retire at 70. I would retire at 68. It would be a graduating scale over a period of time. But again I’m talking about people like myself and Ted who are 45 years old. We’re years away from retirement. For people that are on it now, we don’t have to change it at all. If we don’t do anything, we will have a debt crisis. It’s not a question of if. It is a question of when. In less than five years, only 17 percent of our budget will remain discretionary; 83 percent of the federal budget in less than five years will all be spent on Medicare, Medicaid, the interest on the debt. That’s — all of it will be eaten up by that. That’s a debt crisis. And it will be debilitating to our economy and our children deserve better than to inherit a debt crisis. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Mr. Trump, you don’t want to raise the retirement age, and you also don’t want to cut benefits even for wealthier Americans. But according to the Social Security Administration, unless adjustments are made, Social Security is projected to run out of money within 20 years. So specifically, what would you do to stop that from happening?AdvertisementTRUMP: Well, first of all, I want you to understand that the Democrats, and I’ve watched them very intensely, even though it’s a very, very boring thing to watch, that the Democrats are doing nothing with Social Security. They’re leaving it the way it is. In fact, they want to increase it. They want to actually give more. And that’s what we’re up against. And whether we like it or not, that is what we’re up against. I will do everything within my power not to touch Social Security, to leave it the way it is; to make this country rich again; to bring back our jobs; to get rid of deficits; to get rid of waste, fraud and abuse, which is rampant in this country, rampant, totally rampant. TRUMP: And it’s my absolute intention to leave Social Security the way it is. Not increase the age and to leave it as is. You have 22 years, you have a long time to go. It’s not long in terms of what we’re talking about, but it’s still a long time to go, and I want to leave Social Security as is, I want to make our country rich again so we can afford it. I want to bring back our jobs, I want to do things that will make us, that will bring back GDP... I mean, as an example, GDP was zero essentially for the last two quarters. If that ever happened in China. you would have had a depression like nobody’s ever seen before. They go down to 7 percent, 8 percent, and it’s a — it’s a national tragedy. We’re at zero, we’re not doing anything. We’ve lost our jobs. We’ve lost everything. We’re losing everything. Our jobs are gone, our businesses are being taken out of the country. I want to make America great again and I want to leave Social Security as is. We’re going to get rid of waste, fraud, abuse and bring back business. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Senator Rubio, I know you want to get in. Hang on one second, I just want to follow up with Mr. Trump. You’re talking about waste, fraud and abuse, but an independent bipartisan organization, the Committee For a Responsible Federal Budget, says improper payments like you’re talking about, that would only save about $3 billion, but it would take $150 billion to make Social Security solvent. So how would you find that other $147 million?TRUMP: Because they don’t cover most of the subjects. We’re the policemen of the world. We take care of the entire world. We’re going to have a stronger military, much stronger. Our military is depleted. But we take care of Germany, we take care of Saudi Arabia, we take care of Japan, we take care of South Korea. We take — every time this maniac from North Korea does anything, we immediately send our ships. We get virtually nothing. We have 28,000 soldiers on the line, on the border between North and South Korea. We have so many places. Saudi Arabia was making a billion dollars a day, and we were getting virtually nothing to protect them. We are going to be in a different world. We’re going to negotiate real deals now, and we’re going to bring the wealth back to our country. We owe $19 trillion. We’re going to bring wealth back to our country. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Senator Rubio, will that be enough to save Social Security?RUBIO: No. And I — and I think you’ve outlined why. The numbers don’t add up. You know, when I ran for the Senate in 2010, I came out and said we’re going to have to make changes to Social Security, and everyone said that’s the end of your campaign. In Florida, you can’t talk about that, but people know that it’s the truth here in Florida. Fraud is not enough. Certainly, let’s wipe out the fraud, but as you said, it won’t add up. You already gave those numbers. The second point is on foreign aid. I hear that all the time as well. I’m against any sort of wasting of money on foreign aid, but it’s less than 1 percent of our federal budget. The numbers don’t add up. The bottom line is we can’t just continue to tip-toe around this and throw out things like I’m going to get at fraud and abuse. Let’s get rid of fraud, let’s get rid of abuse, let’s be more careful about how we spend foreign aid. But you still have hundreds of billions of dollars of deficit that you’re going to have to make up. And here’s the thing. If we do not do it, we will have a debt crisis. Not to mention a crisis in Social Security and Medicare. Both parties have taken far too long to deal with it. It is one of the major issues confronting America. It’s barely been asked in any of these debates. And we’d better deal with or we’re going to have to explain to our children why they inherited this disaster. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Mr. Trump, Senator Rubio says your numbers don’t add up. What’s your response? Senator Rubio says that your numbers don’t add up. What’s your response, Mr. Trump?TRUMP: Well, I don’t know if he’s saying that. Look, I’m just saying very simply we have a country that I’ve never seen anything like it. I’ve been going over budgets and looking at budgets. We don’t bid things out. We don’t bid out, as an example, the drug industry, pharmaceutical industry. They don’t go out to bid. They just pay almost as if you walk into a drug store. That’s what they’re paying. And the reason is they have a fantastic lobby. They take care of all of the senators, the Congressmen. They have great power and they don’t bid out. The military is never properly bid. When we go out to military bids, it’s not properly bid. And the people that really sell us the product are oftentimes the product we don’t want, only because that particular company has political juice, OK? I’m self-funding my campaign. Nobody is going to be taking care of me. I don’t want anybody’s money. I will tell you something. We’re going to go out to bid in virtually every different facet of our government. We’re going to save a fortune. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Thank you, Mr. Trump. Senator Cruz, you advocate allowing younger workers to put some of their Social Security taxes into personal accounts. What do you say to critics who say that market volatility means that this is a disastrous proposal?CRUZ: Well, number one, we need to see responsibility. Social Security right now is careening towards insolvency, and it’s irresponsible. And any politician that doesn’t step forward and address it is not being a real leader. We need to see political courage to take this on and save and strengthen Social Security. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementCRUZ: And as president, what I will do for seniors, for anyone at or near retirement, there will be no changes whatsoever. Every benefit will be protected to the letter. But for younger workers, we need to change the rate of growth of benefits so it matches inflation instead of exceeding inflation. And as you noted Dinan, we need to have for younger workers, that a portion of your tax payments are in personal accounts, like the 401(k), that you own, that you control, that you can pass on to your kids and grandkids. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: And one of the things that is critically important. Listen, we’ve got lots of challenges in the world. But the answer can’t just be wave a magic wand and say problem go away. You have to understand the problems. You have to have real solutions. It’s like government spending. It is very easy. Hillary Clinton says she’ll cut waste, fraud and abuse. If only we had smarter people in Washington, that would fix the problem. You know what? That is the statement of a liberal who doesn’t understand government is the problem. (APPLAUSE)
Get real-time analysis.


CRUZ: Here’s my philosophy. The less government, the more freedom. The fewer bureaucrats, the more prosperity. And there are bureaucrats in... (BELL RINGS) ... Washington right now who are killing jobs and I’ll tell you, I know who they are. I will find them and I will fire them.BASH: Did you justice just compare Donald Trump to Hillary Clinton on this issue?CRUZ: I will let Donald speak for himself. But I will say, there’s a reason, in my campaign I’ve laid out a very, very specific spend and cut plan, $500 billion. I’ve specified five major agencies that I would eliminate, 25 programs. And Dana, you know why political candidates don’t do that? Because when you do that, the lobbyists attack you. When you specify the programs you would eliminate, then you get attacked. Let’s talk for example back in Iowa the first primary. When I went to Iowa and campaigned against ethanol mandates, everyone said that was political suicide. You can’t take on ethanol in Iowa. And my opponents on this stage not only didn’t do the same. They attacked me and even promised to expand corporate welfare. (BELL RINGS) If we’re going to stop bankrupting our kids and grandkids, you’ve got to be willing to take on the lobbyists, which means not just some fanciful waste, fraud and abuse, but specifying these are the programs I’ll eliminate so that we can take care of the hard working taxpayer. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Thank you Senator Cruz. Mr. Trump, would you like to respond?TRUMP: Yes. If you look back to Iowa, Ted did change his view and his stance on ethanol quite a bit. He did and — at the end. Not full on, but he did change his view in the hopes of maybe doing well. And you know, I think everybody knows that. It was a front page story all over the place, and he did make a change.BASH: Senator Cruz?CRUZ: Listen, if you are fed up with Washington, the question you ought to be asking is who is willing to take on Washington? It’s easy to have language, I’m fed up with the corruption in Washington. But if you have a candidate who has been funding liberal Democrats and funding the Washington establishment, it’s very hard to imagine how suddenly this candidate is going to take on Washington. When I stood up and led the fight against Obamacare, Washington was furious and attacked me, but I did it because I was honoring my commitment to the hard-working men and women of this country who are losing their jobs because of Obamacare. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: When I led the fight against amnesty, it’s because I was standing with the people... (BELL RINGS) ... against Washington. And if you want to tell people you’re going to stand against Washington, the question we should ask is, when have you ever stood up to the lobbyists in Washington?BASH: OK. Mr. Trump, I’ll let you respond because he mentioned you but then I’m going to move to Governor Kasich. Go ahead.AdvertisementTRUMP: Well, that’s fine. First of all, Ted was in favor of amnesty. So there’s no question about that. And Sheriff Joe Arpaio recently endorsed me and there’s nobody tougher on the borders than Sheriff Joe. And Jeff Sessions, one of the most respected Senator in Washington, an incredible man, also endorsed me. And there’s nobody that knows more about the borders than Senator Jeff Sessions. I would say this. We’re all in this together. We’re going to come up with solutions. We’re going to find the answers to things. And so far I cannot believe how civil it’s been up here. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Governor Kasich, let’s get back to Social Security. You told a voter in New Hampshire to quote, “Get over cuts to Social Security benefits” because you have a reform plan and that is just the reality you say that is out there. Why is cutting Social Security payments the solution?KASICH: Well, first of all, we hear about taking on Washington. I took on Washington and I won. I actually got the budget balanced when I was a member of the Congress, the chairman of the budget committee. We paid down a half a trillion dollars of the national debt. We also balanced the budget four years in a row. And we were just growing jobs like crazy and the wage issue was not even an issue then. I also had a plan in 1999 to save Social Security and take the $5 trillion projected surplus and not only have Social Security for our young people, but also to give them private accounts. Now there are more 18-year-olds who believe they have a better chance of seeing a UFO than a Social Security check and we have a lot of seniors who are very nervous.KASICH: I have a plan to fix it that doesn’t even require raising the retirement age. If you’ve had wealth throughout your lifetime, when the time comes to be on Social Security, you’ll still get it. It will just simply be less. And for those people who depend on that Social Security, they’ll get their full benefit. That’s the way it will work. And we don’t have to monkey around with the retirement age. And how do I know that? I’ve done all this before. This is not a theory. Do you have to take on entitlement programs to balance a budget? Yes. It doesn’t mean you have to cut them. It means you need to innovate them, the way we do things in the 21st Century. So not only did we have a balanced budget in Washington, but when I went to Ohio, we were $8 billion in the hole and now we’re $2 billion in the black. Our credit is strong. We’re up 400,000 jobs. And I want to go back with the same formula to beat the Washington insiders again. And I will get it done, and this country will be much stronger economically as a result. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you, Governor. Let’s take a broader look at the Republican Party now. Mr. Trump, one of the concerns your opponents have expressed throughout the course of this campaign is the notion that in their estimation you hold views that are at direct odds with Republican Party tradition. How are you looking to fundamentally change the Republican Party as its potential leader? What should the Republican Party stand for in 2016?TRUMP: Well, first of all, I don’t really think that. I think that I hold views that are very similar to many of the people. We are more inclusive. And if you look at the polls and if you look at the millions of people that have been pouring into the polls, it’s, again, the biggest story. You look at all of these people that are coming in, something is happening. I am different in one primary respect, and that’s trade. I feel that we have had horrible negotiators, horrible trade deals. The jobs in this country are disappearing, and especially the good jobs. You look at the recent jobs reports, which are really done so that presidents and politicians look good, because all of these people looking for jobs, when they give up, they go home, they give up, and they are considered statistically employed. So that’s that. But I will say, trade deals are absolutely killing our country. The devaluations of their currencies by China and Japan and many, many other countries, and we don’t do it because we don’t play the game. and the only way we’re going to be able to do it is we’re going to have to do taxes unless they behave. If you don’t tax certain products coming into this country from certain countries that are taking advantage of the United States and laughing at our stupidity, we’re going to continue to lose businesses and we’re going to continue to lose jobs. And if you look at the average worker over the last 12 years, their salary and their pay have gone down, not up. It has gone down. And I think that’s why there has been such an outpouring of love to what I’m saying.TAPPER: Thank you, Mr. Trump. Senator Cruz... (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: ... Donald Trump has so far won 35 percent of the vote. Those people are signing up to his vision of the Republican Party. What do you think is wrong with that vision?CRUZ: Well, Donald is right, for example, he was just talking about international trade. He’s right about the problems. But his solutions don’t work. So, for example, his solution on international trade, he proposed earlier a 45 percent tariff on foreign goods. Now he backed away from that immediately and he may come back with a different number tonight. I don’t know where he’ll be tonight. But I’ll tell you what happens. You know, we’ve seen prior presidential candidates who proposed massive tariffs, you know, Smoot- Hawley led to the Great Depression. And the effect of a 45 percent tariff would be when you go to the store, when you go to Walmart, when you are shopping for your kids, the prices you pay go up 45 percent. But not only that, when you put those in place, because a tariff is a tax on you, the American people, but the response of that is that the countries we trade with put in their own tariffs. A much better solution that works is the tax plan I’ve laid out which would enable our exports to be tax-free, would tax our imports, would not raise prices for Americans, and would not result in reciprocal tariffs. Fix the problem and that’s what’s missing from what Donald says. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Mr. Trump, we’ll give you a chance to respond.TRUMP: The 45 percent tax is a threat. It was not a tax, it was a threat. It will be a tax if they don’t behave. Take China as an example. I have many friends, great manufacturers, they want to go into China. They can’t. China won’t let them. We talk about free trade. It’s not tree free trade, it’s stupid trade. China dumps everything that they have over here. No tax, no nothing, no problems, no curfews (ph), no anything. We can’t get into China. I have the best people, manufacturers, they can’t get in. When they get in, they have to pay a tremendous tax. The 45 percent is a threat that if they don’t behave, if they don’t follow the rules and regulations so that we can have it equal on both sides, we will tax you. It doesn’t have to be 45, it could be less. But it has to be something because our country and our trade and our deals and most importantly our jobs are going to hell.(APPLAUSE)AdvertisementTAPPER: Senator Cruz?CRUZ: Jake, let me be clear what Donald just said. He said that that 45 percent tax is a threat. And mind you, you are paying the tax. It’s not China that pays the tax. It’s you, the working men and women. So ask yourself at home: How is this helping you? If your wages have been stagnant for 20 years; if you can’t pay the bills, how does it help you to have a president come and say, “I’m going to jack — I’m going to put a 45 percent tax on diapers when you buy diapers, on automobiles when you buy automobiles, on clothing when you buy clothing.” That hurts you. It’s why we’ve got to get beyond rhetoric of China bad, and actually get to how do you solve the problem. Because this solution would hurt jobs and hurt hard-working taxpayers in America.TAPPER: OK.TRUMP: Jake, I have to say — honestly, it’s just the opposite. What will happen if they don’t behave, we will put on a tax of some amount, and it could be a large amount, and we will start building those factories and those plants. Instead of in China, we’ll build them here. And people will buy products from here, rather than buying it through China where we’re being ripped off. And we have a $505 billion trade deficit right now. So we’ll build our factories here and we’ll make our own products. And that’s the way it should be done. And the way we’ve been doing it for the last long period of time is our country — our country is in serious, serious trouble. It’s a bubble and it’s going to explode, believe me.TAPPER: All right. We’re going to take a very quick break. When we come back, we’ll have much more of this Republican presidential debate from the University of Miami right after this. Stay with us.(APPLAUSE) (COMMERCIAL BREAK)TAPPER: Welcome back to the CNN Republican presidential debate in Miami, Florida. Mr. Trump, let me start with you. Last night, you told CNN quote, “Islam hates us?” Did you mean all 1.6 billion Muslims.TRUMP: I mean a lot of them. I mean a lot of them.DINAN: Do you want to clarify the comment at all?TRUMP: Well, you know, I’ve been watching the debate today. And they’re talking about radical Islamic terrorism or radical Islam. But I will tell you this. There’s something going on that maybe you don’t know about, maybe a lot of other people don’t know about, but there’s tremendous hatred. And I will stick with exactly what I said to Anderson Cooper. (APPLAUSE)DINAN: Senator Rubio, your supporter, Republican Senator Jeff Sessions, said in response to Mr. Trump’s comment last night, I’m sorry — Senator Jeff Flake, I apologize. Your supporter, Republican Senator Jeff Flake said in response to that comment, Republicans are better than this. Do you agree?RUBIO: Well, let me say, I know that a lot of people find appeal in the things Donald says cause he says what people wish they could say. The problem is, presidents can’t just say anything they want. It has consequences, here and around the world. (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: And so let me give you one. Two days ago, I met this extraordinary couple who were on furlough because they are missionaries in Bangladesh. It’s a very tough place to be a missionary. It’s Muslim. And their safety and security very much relies upon friendly Muslims that live along side them, that may not convert, but protect them and certainly look out for them. And their mission field really are Muslims that are looking to convert to Christianity as well. And they tell me that today they have a very hostile environment in which to operate in because the news is coming out that in America, leading political figures are saying that America doesn’t like Muslims. So this is a real impact. There’s no doubt that radical Islam is a danger in the world. I can also tell you if you go to any national cemetery, especially Arlington, you’re going to see crescent moons there. If you go anywhere in the world you’re going see American men and women serving us in uniform that are Muslims. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementRUBIO: And they love America. And as far as I know, no one on this stage has served in uniform in the United States military. Anyone out there that has the uniform of the United States on and is willing to die for this country is someone that loves America. No matter what their religious background may be.DINAN: Mr. Trump? (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: Marco talks about consequences. Well, we’ve had a lot of consequences, including airplanes flying into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and could have been the White House. There have been a lot of problems. Now you can say what you want, and you can be politically correct if you want. I don’t want to be so politically correct. I like to solve problems. We have a serious, serious problem of hate. (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: There is tremendous hate. There is tremendous hate. Where large portions of a group of people, Islam, large portions want to use very, very harsh means. Let me go a step further. Women are treated horribly. You know that. You do know that. Women are treated horribly, and other things are happening that are very, very bad. (BELL RINGS) Now I will say this, there is tremendous hatred. The question was asked, what do you think? I said, there is hatred. Now it would be very easy for me to say something differently. And everybody would say, oh, isn’t that wonderful.DINAN: Mr. Trump, thank you.TRUMP: We better solve the problem before it’s too late.DINAN: Senator Rubio? (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: Well, here we go. See, I’m not interested in being politically correct. I’m not interested in being politically correct. I’m interested in being correct. (APPLAUSE)Nick Corasaniti of The Times points out key moments from the Republican presidential debate on Thursday in Coral Gables, Fla., where candidates discussed Cuba, immigration and climate change.RUBIO: And in order to be correct on this issue, here’s the bottom line. We do work. There is — Islam has a major problem on its hands. It has a significant percentage of its adherents, particular in the Sunni faith but also in the Shia, who have been radicalized. And are willing to fly planes into a building and kill innocent people. There is no doubt about that. It is also true if you look around the world at the challenges we face, we are going to have to work together with other — with Muslims, who do not — who are not radicals. We’re going to have to work with the Jordanian kingdom. We’re going to have to work with the Saudis. We’re going to have to work with the Gulf kingdoms. We’re going to have to work with the Egyptians to defeat, for example, ISIS.(BELL RING)RUBIO: It will take a Sunni Arab movement to defeat them. And so I think you can be correct without meaning to be politically correct. We are going to have to work with people of the Muslim faith even as Islam itself faces a serious crisis within it of radicalization.TAPPER: Thank you, Senator. (APPLAUSE) Governor Kasich, do you think Islam hates us?KASICH: No, I don’t. I think there is a sect of, you know, this radical Islam that is really, really serious, and poses the greatest threat to us today. There isn’t any question. And that’s why the whole world has to work together to make sure that we don’t have proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction. But look, I was there when, and saw it, when the Egyptian ambassador to the United States was in the Rose Garden bringing the Arab Muslim world to work with us to repel Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. The fact is that if we’re going to defeat ISIS, we’re going to have to have these countries. And they are Egypt. And they are Saudi Arabia. And they are Jordan. And they are the Gulf states. And we’re going to have in some way or another a rapprochement with Turkey. And I frankly think the Europeans went in the wrong direction when they rejected Turkey from joining in to the economic sphere of Europe. The simple fact of the matter is, a lot of these Muslim countries, they are just — they can’t believe the stuff they see out of people who have distorted their faith. Look, the people who represent radical Islam, they want to destroy everything that we’re about and other Muslims who don’t share their view. But at the end of the day, we’ve got to bring the world together, the civilized world. And we all speak with one voice to make sure that people who sit on the fence understand what civilization is, and we represent it, and equality and hope for everybody.AdvertisementTAPPER: Thank you, Governor Kasich. Mr. Trump, I want to ask you about something else you’ve said during the course of this campaign. You said that the U.S. has to, quote, “take out” the families of terrorists. When it was pointed out that targeting civilians is against the Geneva Conventions, you said, quote, “So they can kill us, but we can’t kill them?” It is against federal, military and international law to target civilians. So how will you order the military to target the families of suspected terrorists, while also abiding by the law?TRUMP: Let me go back to the other just for a second. In large mosques, all over the Middle East, you have people chanting “death to the USA.” Now, that does not sound like a friendly act to me. As far as the families are concerned, and as far as the law is concerned, we have a law — this all started with your question on water boarding. We have a law that doesn’t allow right now water boarding. They have no laws. They have no rules. They have no regulations. They chop off heads. They drown 40, 50, 60 people at a time in big steel cages, pull them up an hour later, everyone dead. And we’re working on a different set of parameters. Now, we have to obey the laws. Have to obey the laws. But we have to expand those laws, because we have to be able to fight on at least somewhat of an equal footing or we will never ever knock out ISIS and all of the others that are so bad. We better expand our laws or we’re being a bunch of suckers, and they are laughing at us. They are laughing at us, believe me. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Senator Rubio, would you as president pursue a policy of targeting the families of suspected terrorists?RUBIO: No, of course not. And we don’t have to in order to defeat terrorists. The way you defeat terrorists is pretty straightforward. It’s difficult to do, but it has to be done. When I’m president of the United States, the best intelligence agencies in the world that right now have been hamstrung. They’re going to be expanded. And the best intelligence agencies in the world are going to find terrorists. And then the best military in the world, which needs to be rebuilt because — because Barack Obama is gutting our military. He’s going to leave us with the smallest Army since the end of World War II, and the smallest Navy in a century, and the smallest Air Force we’ve ever had. We are going to rebuild that military and that military is going to find the terrorists and destroy them. And if we capture any of these terrorists alive, they’re not going to have the right to remain silent. And they’re not going to go to a courtroom in Manhattan. They’re going to go to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba and we will find out everything they know and we’ll do so legally. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Senator Cruz, you’ve talked about changing the rules of engagement in battle against ISIS. Would that include targeting the families of suspected terrorists?CRUZ: No, of course not. We’ve never targeted innocent civilians and we’re not going to start now. But listen, Jake, I understand. People are scared and for seven years, we’ve faced terrorist attacks and President Obama lectures Americans on Islamophobia. That is maddening. But the answer is not simply to yell, “China bad, Muslims bad.” You’ve got to understand the nature of the threats we’re facing and how you deal with them. And yes, it is true there are millions of radical Islamic terrorists who seek to kill us. We need a president, commander in chief focused on fighting them.CRUZ: And I’ll tell you, frankly one concern I have with Donald is that although his language is quite incendiary, when you look at his substantive policies on Iran, he has said he would not rip up this Iranian nuclear deal. I think that’s a mistake. The Ayatollah Khomeini wants nuclear weapons to murder us. I’ll give you another example, dealing with Islamic radical terrorism. On Israel, Donald has said he wants to be neutral between Israel and the Palestinians. As president, I will not be neutral. And let me say this week, a Texan, Taylor Force. He was an Eagle Scout, he was a West Point graduate, he was an Army veteran. He was murdered by a Palestinian terrorist this week in Israel, and I don’t think we need a commander in chief... (BELL RINGS) ... who is neutral between the Palestinian terrorists and one of our strongest allies in the world, the nation of Israel. (APPLAUSE)HEWITT: Thank you Senator Cruz. Mr. Trump. we’re going to come to you in a second, but wait. I want to go to Hugh Hewitt, who has questions on this exact line of subject.HEWITT: Mr. Trump, I want to follow-up on the quote that Senator Cruz used. You said you would want to be, quote, “sort of a neutral guy”. He did mention Taylor Force. He was a West Point graduate, he was a war hero. He was a Vanderbilt graduate student. He was killed in a Palestinian terror attack near Tel Aviv, many others were killed. And the Israeli government says the Palestinian authority is inciting this. Do you still want to stay neutral when the Palestinian authority is inciting these attacks.AdvertisementTRUMP: First of all, there’s nobody on this stage that’s more pro Israel than I am. OK. There’s nobody. (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: I am pro-Israel. (BOOING)TRUMP: I was the grand marshall, not so long ago, of the Israeli Day Parade down 5th avenue. I’ve made massive contributions to Israel. I have a lot of — I have tremendous love for Israel. I happen to have a son-in-law and a daughter that are Jewish, OK? And two grandchildren that are Jewish. (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: But I will tell you, I think if we’re going to ever negotiate a peace settlement, which every Israeli wants, and I’ve spoken to the toughest and the sharpest, they all want peace, I think it would be much more helpful is — I’m a negotiator. If I go in, I’ll say I’m pro-Israel and I’ve told that to everybody and anybody that would listen. But I would like to at least have the other side think I’m somewhat neutral as to them, so that we can maybe get a deal done. Maybe we can get a deal. I think it’s probably the toughest negotiation of all time. But maybe we can get a deal done.HEWITT: Senator Trump... (CROSSTALK)TRUMP: And, by the way, just so you understand, as far as Iran, I would have never made that deal. I think it’s maybe the world deal I’ve ever seen. I think it’s the worst deal I’ve ever seen negotiated. I will be so tough on them and ultimately that deal will be broken unless they behave better than they’ve ever behaved in their lives, which is probably unlikely. That deal will be broken.HEWITT: Thank you Mr. Trump. Senator Cruz and Senator Rubio.CRUZ: You know, we need a president who understands the national security interests of this country. The reason we are friends and allies with Israel is they are a liberal Democratic country that share our values, they’re our strongest ally in the region. We get billions in intelligence resources, billions in military resources. And the Palestinian Authority that Donald, along with Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama say they want to treat neutrally, the same as Israel. The Palestinian Authority is in a unity government with Hamas, a terrorist organization. They pay the families of these terrorists who murder people. And this is exactly the moral relativism Barack Obama has. And the answer is not scream, all Muslims bad. Let me give you an example of a Muslim for example, we ought to be standing with, President el-Sisi of Egypt, a president of a Muslim country who is targeting radical... (BELL RINGS) ... Islamic terrorist. HEWITT: Senator Rubio.CRUZ: He’s hunting them down and stomping them.HEWITT: Thank you.CRUZ: Our focus needs to be on keeping this country safe.HEWITT: I want to go back to the Israeli government’s assertion that the Palestinian Authority is inciting the convulsion of violence. Do you agree.RUBIO: Well, that’s undeniable. First of all, they’ve said, they’ve encouraged people to do so. And you’ve seen the speeches of the Palestinian Authority president how glorious this is that they’re doing these sorts of things. But let me go back for a moment. The policy Donald has outlined, I don’t know if he realizes, is an anti-Israeli policy. Maybe that’s not your intent but here’s why it is an anti-Israeli policy. There is no peace deal possible with the Palestinians at this moment. There just isn’t. (APPLAUSE)AdvertisementRUBIO: Because there’s no one to negotiate with. The Palestinian Authority is not interested in a serious deal and they are now in union with Hamas, an organization whose specific purpose is the destruction of the Jewish state. Every time that Israel has turned over territory of any kind, be is Gaza, or now in Judea and Sumaira, it is used as a launching pad to attack Israel. And that’s what will happen again. These groups are not interested in a deal with Israel. What they are interested in is ultimately removing the Jewish state and occupying its entire territory. (BELL RINGS) So maybe in 30 years the conditions will exist, but they do not exist now.HEWITT: Mr. Trump, and then I’ll come to you Senator Kasich.RUBIO: And To have a president forcing the Israelis to the table is harmful to the Israeli and emboldens Israel’s enemies. HEWITT: Thank you senator. (APPLAUSE) Mr. Trump a response and then we’ll go to Governor Kasich.TRUMP: If I become president of the United States, one of the things that will be an absolute priority is number one, protection of Israel, but also seeing if a deal can be made, the toughest deal, the toughest negotiation there probably is of any kind no matter where you look, no matter how hard you look. But I would like to give it a shot. Very, very pro-Israel, nobody more pro-Israel. But I would love to give it a shot. And I have to tell you this, Hugh. I have friend, Israelis, non-Israelis, people from New York City that happen to be Jewish and love Israel, and some are very tough people, every single one of them, they know it’s tough, but every single one of them wants to see if we could ever have peace in Israel. And some believe it’s possible. It may not be, in which case we’ll find out. But it would be a priority if I become president to see what I could do.HEWITT: Governor Kasich, do you agree the Israeli government that the Palestinian Authority is inciting this violence? KASICH: Well, there’s no question. They were saying that the Israelis intended to go to the Dome of the Rock. And I mean, when you think about this, thank goodness we work with Israelis to give them the Iron Dome where they can protect themselves against all the missiles that were flying in. Could you imagine living in like Miami here and having people shooting missiles in? Secondly, there was just an article the other day, Hugh, that I know you’re familiar with the Israelis are learning to train underground in combat because the Palestinians now, Hamas in particular, is digging these tunnels trying to get under Israel. They’re coming at them from above, they’re trying to come at them under the ground. And I just have to tell you this, I don’t believe there is any long-term permanent peace solution. And I think pursuing that is the wrong thing to do. I believe that every day that we can stability in that region by supporting the Israelis and making sure they have the weapons and the security that they need with our 100 percent backing is the way to proceed in the Middle East in regard to Israel. (APPLAUSE)HEWITT: Thank you, Governor. Senator Cruz, I want to stay in the region. Just this week the head of U.S. Central Command, General General Lloyd Austin, essentially said it’s going to take a lot more troops on the ground to fix — to end the ISIS threat in Syria and Iraq. From the beginning of this campaign, you have said you will follow the judgment of military commanders in the Pentagon. So here’s the commander saying we need a lot more troops on the ground. Will you follow that advice and inject Americans again into what is in essence is metastasizing Sunni-Shia civil war?CRUZ: We need to do whatever is necessary to utterly defeat ISIS. And that’s needs to be driven not by politicians but by military expertise and judgment. Right now we’re not using a fraction of the tools that we have. We’re not using our overwhelming air power. We’re not arming the Kurds. Those need to be the first steps. And then we need to put whatever ground power is needed to carry it out. But, you know, a question that actually Jake asked, and I’m glad to come back to it now, is rules of engagement. We have right now our troops engaged in combat but President Obama has rules of engagement that are so strict that their arms are tied behind their back. They’re not able to fight. They’re not able to defend themselves. They’re not able to kill the enemy. And I have got to tell you, Hugh, I think that is wrong. It is immoral. And I give my word to every soldier, sailor, and airman, and marine, and every wife and husband, every son and daughter, every mother and father, that will end in January 2017. (APPLAUSE)HEWITT: Governor Kasich, if it takes 20,000 or 30,000, if the Pentagon says that’s what needs to be done, will you follow their advice?KASICH: Hugh, I’ve said all along and laid out my foreign policy, I’m going to remind everybody that 55 percent of the foreign policy experts in this country said I was the best to be commander-in- chief. I spent 18 years on the Defense Committee, Armed Services, and then I was in the Pentagon with Donald Rumsfeld after 9/11, in and out for a couple of years. We absolutely have to win this with a coalition. Arabs have to be with us. The Europeans have to understand that this threat is closer to them than even is closer — is as close as it is to us. And in addition to that, you have to be in the air and you have to be on the ground. And you bring all the force you need. It has got to be “shock and awe” in the military-speak. Then once it gets done, and we will wipe them out, once it gets done, it settles down, we come home and let the regional powers redraw the map if that’s what it takes.
      The days before primaries and caucuses are intense — and often emotional — for voters and candidates alike. We’re capturing that drama.
    HEWITT: Mr. Trump, more troops? TRUMP: We really have no choice. We have to knock out ISIS. We have to knock the hell out of them. We have to get rid of it. And then come back and rebuild our country, which is falling apart. We have no choice.AdvertisementHEWITT: How many... (CROSSTALK)TRUMP: I would listen to the generals, but I’m hearing numbers of 20,000 to 30,000. We have to knock them out fast. Look, we’re not allowed to fight. We can’t fight. We’re not knocking out the oil because they don’t want to create environmental pollution up in the air. I mean, these are things that nobody even believes. They think we’re kidding. They didn’t want to knock out the oil because of what it’s going to do to the carbon footprint. We don’t fight like we used to fight. We used to fight to win. Now we fight for no reason whatsoever. We don’t even know what we’re doing.(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: So, the answer is we have to knock them out. We have to knock them out fast. And we have to get back home. And we have to rebuild our country which is falling apart.TAPPER: Thank you, Mr. Trump. Let’s turn from current conflicts to those who have served in conflicts. Senator Rubio, according to a V.A. study, of the 22 veterans who commit suicide every day, 17 of them have no connection to the V.A. The V.A. believes that this lack of connection is one of the reasons for this tragically high suicide rate. What specifically would you do as president to make sure that veterans in crisis are able to get the help they need?RUBIO: Well, first let me say that one out of four calls to our office is about a veteran here in Florida that’s struggling with the V.A. my brother is a veteran. He’s struggling with the V.A. The other day, we heard this horrible story. It was a headline in USA Today, and it said, “Calls to the V.A. Suicide Hotline Went to Voicemail.” Well, about a few days ago, we now found out that one of the gentlemen — one of the veterans who left a voicemail committed suicide. And they happened to call him back the day after he died. People need to be held accountable for this. One of the things I’m proudest of is that in my time in the U.S. Senate working with Jeff Miller here from Florida in a bipartisan way, and I’ll give him credit — Bernie Sanders was a part of this — we passed a V.A. accountability bill. And what it did is it created now a law that gives the V.A. secretary, because of the law I passed, it gives the V.A. secretary the power to fire people that aren’t doing a good job. Senior executives should be held accountable if the V.A. outreach isn’t working. The problem is no one’s being held accountable. Even after we passed that law, no one’s been fired for no outreach. No one’s been fired for calls going to the voicemail. No one’s been disciplined. No one’s been demoted. When I’m president of the United States, if you work at the V.A. and you are not doing a good job, you will be fired from your job at the V.A. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Governor Kasich, the Veterans Affairs Department is one of the biggest line items in the domestic budget. As part of its attempt to cut costs, the Republican-controlled House of Representatives just voted to try to reduce spending in the post-9/11 GI Bill. Should veterans’ benefits be part of attempts to reduce the deficit?KASICH: I don’t — I haven’t seen the provisions of that bill, Jake. My initial instincts are no. And let me just say about the V.A. When a veteran comes home, they ought to have access to healthcare wherever they want to go at any time, number one. Number two, the Veterans Administration needs to be restructured. It needs to be downsized and spread out. It needs to be so responsive to the needs of the veterans. And secondly, the Pentagon needs to share the information of returning veterans with the veterans’ service operations in the states and with the job people in the states so that when a veteran comes home, they can be linked with a job. And when that happens, that means that every veteran will get work, because they’re our golden employees. No veteran ought to be without healthcare; no veteran ought to be homeless; and no veteran ought to be unemployed in the United States of America.TAPPER: Thank you, Governor Kasich. (APPLAUSE) Let’s turn to another issue of real importance here in Florida. Just over a week from now, President Obama will visit Cuba, the first time in 88 years that a sitting U.S. president will set foot in Cuba. Two of you on this stage have parents who were born in Cuba and moved to the United States. Let’s go back to my colleague Dana Bash.AdvertisementBASH: Senator Rubio, Donald Trump agrees with President Obama in his decision to reengage diplomatically in Cuba. The majority of Americans seem to agree with that as well. So why are President Obama, Donald Trump and the majority of Americans wrong?RUBIO: Well, I would love the relationship between Cuba and the United States to change. But it will require Cuba to change, at least its government. Today, it has not. The fact of the matter is that after these changes were made — after these changes were made, there are now millions and hundreds of millions of dollars that will flow to the Castro regime. It will now allow them to become set permanent and in stone. They will now be able to carry out a transition where the military continues to run the country there. They’ll put a puppet figure forward as their new president. And nothing will change for the Cuban people. There has not been a single democratic opening; not a single change on the island in human rights. In fact, things are worse than they were before this opening. The only thing that’s changed as a result of this opening is that now the Cuban government has more sources of money from which to build out their repressive apparatus and maintain themselves there permanently. And we asked nothing in return. Compare that to the changes that were required in Burma. And by no means is Burma a perfect country. But at least when there was a democratic opening to Burma, they were required to make some democratic openings. When there was a diplomatic opening, it required democratic opening. And today, the former minority party is now the majority party in their legislative body. He asked nothing in return and we are getting nothing in return. And Cuba and its regime remains an anti-American communist dictatorship, helped North Korea evade U.N. sanctions. It’s harboring fugitives of American justice, including people stealing our Medicare money and moving back to Cuba, all in exchange for nothing.(APPLAUSE)BASH: Mr. Trump, you said the concept of opening Cuba is fine. You said the concept of opening Cuba is fine. Why do you agree with President Obama and disagree with what Senator Rubio just said?TRUMP: Well, I don’t really agree with President Obama. I think I’m somewhere in the middle. What I want is I want a much better deal to be made because right now, Cuba is making — as usual with our country, we don’t make good deal. We don’t have our right people negotiating, we have people that don’t have a clue. As an example, I heard recently where the threat was made that they want reparations for years of abuse by the United States, and nobody’s talking about it and they’ll end up signing a deal and then we’ll get sued for $400 billion or $1 trillion. All that stuff has to be agreed to now. We don’t want to get sued after the deal is made. So I don’t agree with President Obama, I do agree something should be — should take place. After 50 years, it’s enough time, folks. But we have to make a good deal and we have to get rid of all the litigation that’s going to happen. This was just a little story but it was a big story to me because I said oh, here we go, we make a deal, then get sued for a tremendous amount of money for reparations. So I want to do something, but it’s got to be done intelligently. We have to make good deal.BASH: Senator Rubio, I know you want to get in. But just to be clear, Mr. Trump, are you saying that if you were president, you would continue the diplomatic relations or would you reverse them?TRUMP: I would want to make a good deal, I would want to make a strong, solid, good deal because right now, everything is in Cuba’s favor. Right now, everything, every single aspect of this deal is in Cuba’s favor. It the same way as the Iran deal. We never walked — we never — all we do is keep giving. We give and give and give.BASH: But Mr. Trump, just to be clear, there is an embassy that you would have to decide whether it would be open or whether you would close it. Which would it be? In Havana.TRUMP: I would probably have the embassy closed until such time as a really good deal was made and struck by the United States. (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: All right, first of all, the embassy is the former consulate. It’s the same building. So it could just go back to being called a consulate. We don’t have to close it that way. Second of all, I don’t know where Cuba is going to use, but if they sue us in a court in Miami, they’re going to lose. (LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE) Third, on the issue of a good deal, I know what the good deal. I’ll tell you what the good deal now, it’s already codified. Here’s a good deal — Cuba has free elections, Cuba stops putting people in jail for speaking out, Cuba has freedom of the press, Cuba kicks out the Russians from Lourdes (ph) and kicks out the Chinese listening station in Berupal (ph) Cuba stops helping North Korea evade U.N. sanctions, Cuba takes all of those fugitives of America justice, including that cop killer from New Jersey, and send her back to the United States and to jail where she belongs. And you know what? Then we can have a relationship with Cuba. That’s a good deal. (APPLAUSE)BASH: Thank you, Senator Rubio. Senator Cruz, if you become president, would you reverse course and once again break diplomatic relations with Cuba?CRUZ: Yes, I would. And you know, I think this exchange actually highlights a real choice for Republican primary voters. When it comes to foreign policy, do you want to continue on the same basic trajectory as the last seven years of the Obama foreign policy? When it comes to these deals, Cuba and Iran, they were negotiated by Hillary Clinton and John Kerry. There’s a real difference between us. Donald supported Hillary Clinton and John Kerry. And what he said right now is that he agrees in principle with what they’re doing. The only thing he thinks is that they should negotiate a little bit better deals, they should be more effective. I have a fundamental disagreement and I think most Republicans and most Americans do, that we shouldn’t be allowing billions of dollars to go to nations that hate us to go to Cuba, to go to Iran and to let them use those billions of dollars to try to murder us. (APPLAUSE)CUBA: Thank you Senator Cruz. Mr. Trump.TRUMP: Well, if Ted was listening, he would have heard me say something very similar. I said we would not do the deal unless it was going to be a very good deal for us. And I think I said it loud and I think I said it very clear. And I think after 50 years, and I have many friends, I own many properties in Miami, many, many, and I have many people that know and they feel exactly the way I do, make a deal, it would be great, but it’s got to be a great deal for the United States, not a bad deal for the United States. As far as Iran is concerned, I would have never made that deal. That is one of the worst deals ever, ever made by this country. It is a disaster. So for Ted to say I agree with this deal, I mean, it’s a staple in my speeches that that may he worst single deal I’ve ever seen negotiated. So don’t try to put it on me like it’s wonderful, like I love it.BASH: Senator Cruz, your response?CRUZ: Well, look. I’ll point out first of all it is a matter of public record that Donald supported John Kerry in 2004 over George W. Bush, and he supported Hillary Clinton, gave her two checks in a presidential campaign in 2008. And indeed, once she was secretary of State, he described her as one of the greatest secretaries of State in industry. CRUZ: And, you know, the point on the Iran deal, his answer to everything is if only if someone smarter were in government, things would be better. No. We don’t just need smarter people in government. We need leaders that are protecting American interests. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: And when it comes to Iran, Donald has said he would leave the agreement in place and try to renegotiate it, giving the Ayatollah Khomeini over $100 billion. That reflects you do not understand the radical Islam terrorist that is the Ayatollah that wants to murder us. We need a commander in chief that understands our enemies... (BELL RINGS) ... understands and doesn’t give them billions of dollars to threaten our safety and security. (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: I was against the giving of the money at all cost. I said don’t negotiate at all until you get the prisoners back. If the prisoners don’t come back early — three years ago. One of the longest negotiations I’ve ever seen, by the way. If they don’t come back early, I was saying don’t negotiate. They come back early. What you do is you take it back and you say, either give us the prisoners or we double up the sanctions. What we should have done is doubled up the sanctions and made a much better deal. Cause that deal is a disaster. Ted, the money is largely gone because of incompetent and very, very poor negotiators. But that money, the $150 billion, is largely gone and already spent everywhere but the United States.BASH: Thank you Mr. Trump. Let’s refocus this back on Cuba. Governor Kasich, a pair of entrepreneurs from Alabama and North Carolina have just received approval to build the first U.S. factory in Cuba, making tractor for small farms. This is a direct result of President Obama’s policy in Cuba that we’ve been talking about. If you were elected would you encourage more U.S. companies to do business like that in Cuba?KASICH: No, I wouldn’t. Listen, I think the problem with the administration, if you talk to our friends around the world, they say what is America doing? You know, you don’t support us, we can’t figure out where you are. You won’t arm the freedom fighters in Ukraine, we let the Russians trump up some excuse in the business of Russian-speaking people. You had a red line in Syria. You walked away from it. You refused to fund the Syrian rebels, you undercut Egypt and we ended up with the Muslim brotherhood for awhile. And then we turn our back on Netanyahu when he comes to Congress to talk about his concerns of the Iranian deal. Look, I know in human nature sometimes there’s a sense that you make better with your enemies than you do with your friends. And you know what happens when you do that? You make a terrible mistake. You need to support your friends, you need to hold your enemies out here... (APPLAUSE)KASICH: ... and you need to negotiate tough deals. The fact is, they need to understand who we are. The Chinese understand. They don’t own the South China Sea. They have to stop hacking everything we have in this country or we’ll take out their systems. We will arm the Ukrainians so they have lethal defensive aid. We will destroy ISIS and Mr. Putin, you better understand, you’re either with us or you’re against us. We’re not rattling a sword. You’re not our enemy but we’re not going to put up with this nonsense any longer. And a strong America is what the entire world is begging for. Where has America gone is what many of our allies say around the world. (BELL RINGS) When I’m president, they’re going to know exactly where we are because we’re coming back.TAPPER: Thank you governor. Thank you governor. While we’re discussing the issues of importance to Floridians, I reached out to the Republican mayor of Miami, Tomas Regalado, to find out what he wanted to hear from you this evening. Mayor Regalado told me, quote, “Climate change means rising ocean levels, which in south Florida means flooding downtown and in our neighborhoods. It’s an every day reality in our city. Will you, as president acknowledge the reality of the scientific consensus about climate change and as president, will you pledge to do something about it?” Unquote. Senator Rubio, the Miami mayor has endorsed you. Will you honor his request for a pledge and acknowledge the reality of the scientific consensus of climate change and pledge to do something about it?
                A coalition of Republicans is banking on a scenario in which Donald J. Trump fails to reach the 1,237 delegates required to secure the party’s nomination before its July convention, creating a potential opening for another nominee as the delegates vote on the convention floor.            RUBIO: Well, sure if the climate is changing and one of the reasons is because the climate has always been changing. (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: There’s never been a time when the climate has not changed. I think the fundamental question for a policy maker is, is the climate changing because of something we are doing and if so, is there a law you can pass to fix it? So on the issue of flooding in Miami, it’s caused by two things. Number one, south Florida is largely built on land that was once a swamp. And number two, because if there is higher sea levels or whatever it may be happening, we do need to deal with that through mitigation. And I have long supported mitigation efforts. But as far as a law that we can pass in Washington to change the weather, there’s no such thing. (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: On the contrary, there is laws they want us to pass. There are laws they want to us pass that would be devastating for our economy or these programs like what the president has put in with the Clean Power Act or all these sorts of things that he’s forcing down our throats on the war on coal. Let me tell you who is going to pay the price of that? Americans are going to pay the price of that. The cost of doing that is going to be rammed down the throats of the American consumer, the single parent, the working families who are going to see increases in the cost of living.RUBIO: The businesses who are going to leave America because it’s more expensive to do business here than anywhere else. And you know what passing those laws would have — what impact it would have on the environment? Zero, because China is still going to be polluting and India is still going to be polluting at historic levels. So, I am in favor of a clean environment. My children live in South Florida. My family is being raised here. I want this to be a safe and clean place, but these laws some people are asking us to pass will do nothing for the environment and they will hurt and devastate our economy.TAPPER: So just to clarify, Senator Rubio, Mayor Regalado when he talks about the reality of the scientific consensus about climate change, the Republican mayor of Miami, he’s saying the scientific consensus is that man does contribute to climate change. When you talk to him, because he is the mayor of Miami and he has endorsed you, do you tell him that he’s wrong?RUBIO: I would say to him that there is no law that they want us to pass that would have any impact on that. If we pass — if you took the gift list of all of these groups that are asking us to pass these laws and did every single one of them, there would be no change in our environment. Sea level would still rise. All these other things that are happening would continue to go on for a lot of different reasons. One, because America is not a planet. It’s a country. And number two, because these other countries like India and China are more than making up in carbon emissions for whatever we could possibly cut. Here’s what he will immediately — and Mayor Regalado is a great mayor and a good friend — but here’s what he’s going to immediately going to start hearing from. He will immediately start hearing from families in South Florida who are barely making it by, and now their electric bill went up $20 or $30 a month because we just made it more expensive to generate power. That cost will be passed on to working families. I am not going to destroy the U.S. economy for a law that will do nothing for our environent. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Governor Kasich, what would you say to the mayor of Miami?KASICH: Well, I — I do believe we contribute to climate change, but I don’t think it has to be a, you know, either you’re for some environmental stringent rules or, you know, you’re not going to have any jobs. The fact is, you can have both. In our state, we’ve reduced emissions by 30 percent. But let me tell you also what we’re trying to do. We want all the sources of energy. We want to dig coal, but we want to clean it when we burn it. We believe in natural gas. We believe in nuclear power. And you know what else I believe in? I happen to believe in solar energy, wind energy, efficiency, renewables matter. Now, it doesn’t mean because you pursue a policy of being sensitive to the environment, because we don’t know how much humans actually contribute. But it is important we develop renewables. Battery technology can unleash an entirely different world. So the fact is that you can have a strong environmental policy at the same time that you have strong economic growth and they are not inconsistent with one another.TAPPER: Thank you, Governor. Senator Cruz, I want to talk a little bit right now about how you gentlemen see the world. Senator Cruz, Colin Powell this week said that the nasty tone of this presidential election is hurting the image of the U.S. abroad. He said, quote, “foreigners of the world looking at this are distressed.” Does it matter to you what the rest of the world thinks of the United States?CRUZ: Of course it does. And we’ve seen for seven years a president that has made the presidency and has made, sadly, his administration a laughing stock in the world. This administration started with President Obama sending back the bust of Winston Churchill to the United Kingdom within the opening weeks. Then he proceeded to go on a worldwide apology tour apologizing for the United States of America. Our friends and allies quickly learned America could not be counted on. I’ll tell you, when I travel abroad, when I meet with heads of states and defense ministers and foreign ministers, they say over and over again, “it is hard to be friends with America; we can’t count on America; America doesn’t stand with us.” And that is a disgrace. But the good news is, Jake, we’ve seen this before. We have seen a weak Democratic president undermine the military, weaken our readiness, weaken our respect in the world with Jimmy Carter. And in January 1981, Ronald Reagan came into office and that can change overnight. It’s worth remembering Iran released our hostages the day Ronald Reagan was sworn into office. (APPLAUSE) And America needs a president who stands with our friends and allies, as I will do, and who stands up and demonstrates strengths to our enemies. That’s why on day one, I will rip to shreds this catastrophic Iranian nuclear deal because the Ayatollah Khamenei must never be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you, Senator.TAPPER: Mr. Trump, some of your Republican critics have expressed concern about comments you have made praising authoritarian dictators. You have said positive things about Putin as a leader and about China’s massacre of pro-democracy protesters at Tiananmen Square, you’ve said: “When the students poured into Tiananmen Square, the Chinese government almost blew it, then they were vicious, they were horrible, but they put it down with strength. That shows you the power of strength.” How do you respond...TRUMP: That doesn’t mean I was endorsing that. I was not endorsing it. I said that is a strong, powerful government that put it down with strength. And then they kept down the riot. It was a horrible thing. It doesn’t mean at all I was endorsing it. As far as Putin is concerned, I think Putin has been a very strong leader for Russia. I think he has been a lot stronger than our leader, that I can tell you. I mean, for Russia, that doesn’t mean I’m endorsing Putin.TAPPER: But the word strong obviously is a compliment... (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: ... and many people would look at what the Chinese leaders have done and what Putin is doing as atrocities. TRUMP: I used to think Merkel was a great leader until she did what she did to Germany. Germany is a disaster right now. So I used to think that. (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: And strong doesn’t mean good. Putin is a strong leader, absolutely. I could name many strong leaders. I could name very many very weak leaders. But he is a strong leader. Now I don’t say that in a good way or a bad way. I say it as a fact.TAPPER: Governor Kasich, when you were a member of Congress, you were outspoken about the Tiananmen Square massacre. What do you think?KASICH: I think that the Chinese government butchered those kids. And when that guy stood in front — that young man stood in front of that tank, we ought to build a statue of him over here when he faced down the Chinese government. (APPLAUSE)KASICH: Now I will tell you, I don’t believe that we need to make China an enemy. They are a competitor. But I want to go back to three things they should do. We should have the heat on them to work in North Korea to get rid of that guy and the things that he’s doing, number one. Number two, they need to realize they don’t own the South China Sea. And I will compliment the administration for sending a carrier battle group into the South China Sea. And thirdly, when it comes to the issue of cyber attacks, we’re going to have to beef up the cyber command. And they need to understand that if you attack us we will defend ourselves, everything, including our grid. But if you do it, we have the capability to take out your systems. The president has not given the cyber command that authority. I will. And when it comes to trade, I will tell you this, they can’t manipulate their currency. That will not be anything that I would allow them to get away with. And if I saw them doing it, I would take immediate action and make sure that the American worker is protected. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you, Governor Kasich. We’re going to take another quick break. When we come back, we’ll have more of the Republican presidential debate from Miami, Florida, right after this. Stay with us.(COMMERCIAL BREAK) (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Welcome back to the CNN Republican presidential debate in Miami, Florida. Mr. Trump, I want to start with you in this block. Earlier today, a man was arrested and charged with assault after sucker- punching a protester in the face at your rally in Fayettville, North Carolina. This is hardly the first incident of violence breaking out at one of your rallies. Today, Hillary Clinton, your potential general election opponent, clearly indicated she sees this as an issue for the campaign. She said, quote, “this kind of behavior is repugnant. We set the tone for our campaigns, we should encourage respect, not violence.” Do you believe that you’ve done anything to create a tone where this kind of violence would be encouraged?TRUMP: I hope not. I truly hope not. I will say this. We have 25 (thousand), 30,000 people — you’ve seen it yourself. People come with tremendous passion and love for the country, and when they see protest — in some cases — you know, you’re mentioning one case, which I haven’t seen, I heard about it, which I don’t like. But when they see what’s going on in this country, they have anger that’s unbelievable. They have anger. They love this country. They don’t like seeing bad trade deals, they don’t like seeing higher taxes, they don’t like seeing a loss of their jobs where our jobs have just been devastated. And I know — I mean, I see it. There is some anger. There’s also great love for the country. It’s a beautiful thing in many respects. But I certainly do not condone that at all, Jake.TAPPER: Some of your critics point to quotes you’ve made at these debates — at these rallies including February 23rd, “I’d like to punch him in the face,” referring to a protesters. February 27th, “in the good ol’ days, they’d have ripped him out of that seat so fast.” February 1st, “knock the crap out of him, would, you? Seriously, OK, just knock the hell. I promise you I will pay for the legal fees, I promise, I promise.” (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: We have some protesters who are bad dudes, they have done bad things. They are swinging, they are really dangerous and they get in there and they start hitting people. And we had a couple big, strong, powerful guys doing damage to people, not only the loudness, the loudness I don’t mind. But doing serious damage. And if they’ve got to be taken out, to be honest, I mean, we have to run something. And it’s not me. It’s usually the municipal government, the police because I don’t have guards all over these stadiums. I mean, we fill up stadiums. It’s usually the police — and, by the way, speaking of the police, we should pay our respects to the police because they are taking tremendous abuse in this country and they do a phenomenal job. (APPLAUSE) So we should pay — we should truly give our police. They’re incredible people, we should give them a great deal more respect than they receive. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Senator Cruz, are you concerned at all that these kind of scenes potentially hurt the Republican party for the general election?CRUZ: Listen, I think for every one of us, we need to show respect to the people. We need to remember who it is we’re working for. You know, we’ve seen for seven years a president who believes he’s above the law, who behaves like an emperor, who it is all about him and he forgot that he’s working for the American people. And let me — let me ask, turn the camera our here. How many of y’all feel disrespected by Washington?(APPLAUSE)CRUZ: Washington isn’t listening to the people. And that’s the frustration that is boiling over. And we need to nominate and elects a president who remembers, he works for the people. You know, at Donald’s rallies recently, he’s taken to asking people in the crowd to raise their hand and pledge their support to him. Now, I got to say to me, I think that’s exactly backwards. This is a job interview. We are here pledging our support to you, not the other way around. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: And the only hand raising I’m interested in doing is on January 20, 2017 raising my hand with my left hand on the... (BELL RINGS) ... bible and pledging to the American people to preserve, protect and defend the constitution of United States.TAPPER: Thank you senator. Mr. Trump, if you’d like to respond.TRUMP: It shows the total dishonesty of the press. We were having — on a few occasions, again massive crowds. And we’re talking and I’m saying who is going to vote on Tuesday? Who is going to vote? The place goes crazy. Then I say, hey, do me a favor. Raise your right hand. Do you swear you’re going to vote for Donald Trump? Everyone’s laughing, we’re all having a good time. That’s why I have much bigger crowds than Ted, because we have a good time at mine. (APPLAUSE)TRUMP: But we’re all having a good time and the next day, on the Today Show and a couple of other place, not too many. Because when you look at it, everyone’s smiling, laughing. Their arms are raised like this. They had pictures, still pictures of people and they tried to equate it to Nazi Germany. (BELL RINGS) It is a disgrace. It was a total disgrace. And I’ve had reporters, people that you know, come up to me and said that — what they did on the Today Show was a disgrace. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Governor Kasich, do you worry about the scenes of violence at some of these rallies affecting the Republican party’s chances in November?Subscribe for updates on the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.KASICH: Well, I worry about the violence at a rally period. I mean, it’s — you know, elections are important but the unity of this country really matters. Jake, here’s what I think is happening. There are people out there who are worried about their jobs. They’re worried that somebody is going to come in and tell them they’re out of work and they’re 54 years old and they don’t know where they’re going to get another job, a man and a woman. Maybe they’re worried about a trade deal. They’re worried about the fact that their wages haven’t gone up. They’re worried that their kids went to college and the promise was, you go to college, you get a job, things are going to be great. They went to college, they rang up debt and they’re still living in their parents’ basement. People are uptight. Our seniors are worried they’re going to lose their Social Security. There’s two ways to treat it. You can either prey on that and be negative about it, or you tell people that these things can be fixed. If we’re Americans rather than Republicans and Democrats, we get together, we can solve all of these problems. We can provide financial security, we can drive the wages up, we can get kids jobs with a more robust economy. (BELL RINGS) And you know what? They want to help solve these problems right where they live and I’ll give them the power to do it.TAPPER: Thank you governor. Senator Rubio? I know you want to say something.RUBIO: I do. A couple of points. The first is, I’m concerned about violence in general in this society. And by the way, the first people that are facing that violence are our law enforcement officers. And they deserve our respect and they deserve our thanks for everything they do for us. On the issue of anger. Yes, people are angry. Of course they’re angry. Every institution in America has been failing us for the better part of 20 years or 30 years. But leadership is not about using the anger, leadership is about using the anger to motivate us, not to define us. But to motivate us to take action. Being here in Miami is special. My grandfather lived with us most of his life while I was growing up. And he would sit on the porch of our home and tell me all kinds of stories and things I learned about history. My grandfather was born in 1899 before there were airplanes in the sky. One night in the summer of 1969, he watched a man set foot on the moon. (BELL RINGS) You know what he said when he saw that? He said Americans can do anything. Americans can do anything. There is no problem before us we cannot solve and we can solve it if we come together in a serious way, in this generation.TAPPER: Thank you senator.RUBIO: And embrace all of the principles that made us great.TAPPER: Thank you senator. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: The math suggests that it possible that not one of you will reach the magic number of 1,237 delegates before the Republican convention, which would mean a contested convention. Let’s go back to Salem Radio’s Hugh Hewitt.HEWITT: Thank you Jake. Governor Kasich, the math and the maps say that you can only become the nominee if in fact there is a contested convention. If we arrive on the shores of Lake Erie, Donald Trump has the most delegates. Why shouldn’t the person with the most delegates, even if it’s not a majority of delegates, be the nominee?KASICH: Well, first of all, let’s not — you know, math doesn’t tell the whole story in politics. The great thing about politics, the reason why we watch it is because what’s true today is not necessarily true tomorrow. So let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Secondly, look, when you went to school up there in Salem, Ohio, OK.KASICH: If you got an 86, you got a B. Because everybody else had an 84 didn’t mean you got an A. So you just have to win enough delegates to be the nominee. And frankly, I don’t know if we’re going to get a convention like that. But if we do, I was at one in 1976 as a wee lad and supported Ronald Reagan and actually worked directly with him. He tried valiantly. He lost. Gerald Ford won. The party was united. Gerald Ford served the country great by pardoning Richard Nixon. He lost the election probably because of that, but he put America first. And we were healed as a party. So, look, you have to earn the delegates in order to be picked. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. We don’t know what’s going to happen because we still have about half the delegates to be selected. And that’s what’s going to be a very interesting thing to see how it all turns out as we move forward over the next couple of weeks. (APPLAUSE)HEWITT: Thank you, Governor. Mr. Trump, if you arrive in Cleveland with a plurality and the most, but not a majority, is it legitimate for someone else to emerge from that convention the nominee? And if so, would you support that person? TRUMP: I think that what should happen, getting back maybe a little bit to your first question, I think that whoever — first of all, I think I’m going to have the delegates. OK? I think. Let’s see what happens. (APPLAUSE) But if somebody doesn’t have the delegates, and I guess there’s two of us up here that can and there are two of us that cannot at this moment. But if — no, that’s just — by the way, that is not meant to be a criticism. That’s just a mathematical fact. OK? If two of us get up there, I would say this, if — if Marco, if the governor, if Ted had more votes than me in the form of delegates, I think whoever gets to the top position as opposed to solving that artificial number that was by somebody, which is a very random number, I think that whoever gets the most delegates should win. That’s what I think.HEWITT: Senator Cruz, if you — if you overtake Donald Trump at the convention, what will you do to take his very passionate supporters and keep them from bolting the convention and sabotaging the fall election?CRUZ: Well, look, there are some folks in Washington...TRUMP: Make me president. (APPLAUSE)CRUZ: Donald, you are welcome to be president of the Smithsonian. (APPLAUSE) You know, there are some in Washington who are having fevered dreams of a brokered convention. They are unhappy with how the people are voting and they want to parachute in their favored Washington candidate to be the nominee. I think that would be an absolute disaster and we need to respect the will of the voters. (APPLAUSE) It’s one of the reasons why in the course of this election — listen, everyone up here has worked very hard. But Donald is right, there are only two of us that have a path to winning the nomination, Donald and myself. At this point, I have roughly 360 delegates. He has about 100 more than I have. We have at this point beaten Donald in eight separate states all over the country geographically, from Maine to Alaska, from Kansas to Texas, all over this country we have beaten him. And so for the people at home, if you’re one of the 65, 70 percent of Republicans who recognizes that if we nominate Donald Trump, Hillary wins. That’s why the media wants him to be the nominee so much. If you recognize that, then I want to invite you if you’ve supported other candidates, come and join us. We are seeing candidates coming together and uniting. It’s why Carly Fiorina endorsed me yesterday. It’s why Mike Lee endorsed me today. I ask everyone to come together. Let’s stand together and let’s beat Hillary Clinton in November.HEWITT: All right. Thank you, Senator. (APPLAUSE) Mr. Trump, then to Senator Rubio.TRUMP: You know, I listen and I watch Ted on television and when he speaks, and he’s always saying, “I’m the only one that beat Donald in six contests; and I beat him.” But I beat him in 13 contests. He never mentions that. (APPLAUSE) And let me just tell you another little fact, little minor fact. I have about a 1.6 million votes during this primary season, more votes than Ted. The other thing is, I beat Hillary, and I will give you the list, I beat Hillary in many of the polls that have been taken. And each week, I get better and better. And believe me, I haven’t even started on her yet.HEWITT: Senator Rubio?RUBIO: Let me tell you what this election is about for me. And I get all the delegate math and all that debate. Let me tell you what’s about for me. On Tuesday night, I didn’t do as well, obviously, as I wanted to. And I was a little bit disappointed when I got home. And my wife told me a story that night, which is the reason why I can get up the next day and keep fighting. There’s a gentleman here in South Florida who just got out of surgery. And his doctors told him he needs to be home resting. But every afternoon, he takes his little aluminum chair and he sits outside of an early polling center and holds a sign that says “Marco Rubio.”RUBIO: Because for him, I symbolize all the sacrifices that his generation made so their children could have a better life than themselves (APPLAUSE) That gentleman has not given up on me and I am not going to give up on him. I am going to work tirelessly every single day — (APPLAUSE) ... because this election is too important. What’s at stake is the future of this country. And I believe — I believe that at the end of this process this nation will make the right choice because I’ve always believed that God has blessed America, that God’s hand is upon this country and that its greatest days are yet to come. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you, Senator. Let’s send it back to Stephen Dinan of the Washington Times. Stephen?DINAN: Mr. Trump, one of your biggest selling points is that you are largely self-funding your campaign, and you argue your opponents are controlled by their special interest donors. Will you maintain your pledge not to take outside contributions throughout the general election?TRUMP: I have not made that decision yet. I will make a decision on that, but I have not made that decision. My decision was that I would go through the entire primary season and I have turned down probably $275 million worth. I have many, many friends that come up all day long, $5 million, $10 million, I’m turning down money. I feel sort of foolish to be honest with you. I don’t know if I get any credit for it but I’m self-funding my campaign. And other than — and by the way, other than very small donations where people are sending in $200, $15, $20, and we have some of that, but it’s not a large amount. No, I’m self-funding my campaign, and the reason is that I’ve been in this business a long time and I was on the other side — until eight months ago I was on the or side. I made massive contributions, large contributions to politicians, both Democrats and Republicans. I was liked by everybody, which is an important thing. I will say this — people control special interests, lobbyists, donors, they make large contributions to politicians and they have total control over those politicians. I don’t want anybody to control me but the people right out there. And I’m going to do the right thing. (APPLAUSE)DINAN: Senator Cruz, I want to come to you. The vast majority of Republicans, and voters overall, agree with Mr. Trump that candidates are beholden to people and groups who donate to their campaigns. Do you deny that those big donors do have influence?CRUZ: Well look, absolutely. And one of the things we’re so frustrated about is the corruption, what I’ve called the Washington cartel. It’s career politicians in both parties that get in bed with the lobbyists and special interests. And listen, Donald told you for 40 years he’s been sitting at that table using his money to buy influence, supporting liberal Democrats like Hillary Clinton and John Kerry, but also supporting the Republican establishment and funding their effort to crush the Tea Party. And now his argument is after four decades of being part of that influence buying, after Hillary Clinton spending decades being part of that influence selling, that suddenly he will change. But the interesting point is tonight he hasn’t pointed to a single special interest he’s willing to take on. He didn’t take on Wall Street when he supported the TARP bailout in Wall Street. He won’t take on ethanol. And my campaign, by contrast, was funded by 1.1 million contributions all over this country.DINAN: Thank you, Senator. I want to go to Mr. Trump...CRUZ: $62 at tedcruz.org.DINAN: ... for a response. Thank you, Senator.CRUZ: That’s who you’ve got to be accountable to, the people.TRUMP: Ted was given to PACs. I mean, PACs — you know, these super PACs are a disaster, by the way, folks. Very corrupt. It’s going to lead to lots of disasters. But Ted has super PACs and you have to look at the people that are giving to those super PACs, number one. It’s very important to do that. There is total control of the candidates, I know it better than anybody that probably ever lived. And I will tell you this, I know the system far better than anybody else and I know the system is broken. And I’m the one, because I know it so well because I was on both sides of it, I was on the other side all my life and I’ve always made large contributions. And frankly, I know the system better than anybody else and I’m the only one up here that’s going to be able to fix that system because that system is wrong.DINAN: Thank you, Mr. Trump. Senator Rubio, I want to come to you with a question. At the last debate, you mocked Mr. Trump for being flexible. With so much gridlock in Washington, how can you expect to lead the country and get things done if you aren’t willing to show flexibility?RUBIO: Well, I think you can be flexible about ideas, you shouldn’t be flexible about your principles. About when it comes to ideas and working with people, I have a record of having done that. Listen, on the issue of higher education, I’m the only one that continually talks about student loan debt because I owed over $100,000 of student loan debt. So I know this is a major issue. And all my ideas that deal with higher education are bipartisan. The VA Accountability Act that I passed I did it on a — on a bipartisan basis. The sanctions that I helped — that I imposed on Hezbollah I did it on a bipartisan basis. The Girls Count Act that deals with human trafficking, we did that on a bipartisan basis. RUBIO: But I also want to be frank. There are issues we’re going to have to have an election over. When it comes to repealing and replaces Obamacare, that’s not going to be bipartisan. When it comes to reducing the tax burdens on Americans, that’s not going to be bipartisan. When it comes to shrinking the size of the federal bureaucracy,that’s probably not going to be bipartisan. There are issues we can work together on and we should, but there are fundamental issues about the proper role of government. And on those issues, I will fight anyone who wants to expand government, raise taxes, or weaken our military. (APPLAUSE)DINAN: All right. Mr. Trump, I want to give you a chance to respond, but specifically you talked about flexibility and one of the examples you gave was the height of the border fence. What are some of the other issues on which you’re willing to show flexibility?TRUMP: It depends on what comes up. You never know. It depends on what comes up. Look, look, we had a great president, Ronald Reagan. We had Tip O’Neill, speaker. And what do we do, we take these two men that are very, very different men, they got along, they had relationships, and they got things, and very beautifully. Nobody is complaining about the deals that Ronald Reagan made. And he made it with Tip O’Neill. We need to have people get together and work good deals out, good deals out from our standpoint. And I’ll tell you this, it can be done. We don’t want to continue to watch people signing executive orders because that was not what the Constitution and the brilliant designers of this incredible document had in mind. We need people that can make deals and can work, because right now in Washington there’s total, absolute gridlock.DINAN: Thank you. I want to go to Governor Kasich on this issue of flexibility, sir.KASICH: Well, look, my record speaks for itself. What I talk about tonight is not a theory. These are things that I’ve done. I was there when we reformed the Pentagon on a bipartisan basis to give control to the commanders in the field and force the services to work together. I was the chief architect, along with Senator Domenici, of the last time we balanced the budget and the first time since we walked on the moon. I was there when I worked on the welfare reform in Washington. And we got it done and we eliminated the entitlement on welfare, I then went to Ohio and took Ohio from a basket case, working in a bipartisan basis to reform many things, including the Cleveland public schools, working with a Democratic mayor. My problem isn’t that people don’t know this. They say, well, what does that mean? Does that mean you’re too easy? Well, let me tell you, when we did the balanced budget, we cut the capital gains tax, we provided a family tax credit, we shrunk the government. In my state, the state of Ohio, has the smallest government in the state of Ohio in 30 years. Conservative principles will work. But show respect to the other side. One final thing, in regard to Social Security, we will not get that done alone. We will have to have some responsible Democrats who will come in to fix the problem of Social Security. I know how to do it because I’ve done it and I’ll do it again. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Thank you, Governor. We have time for one last break. We’ll be right back after this.(APPLAUSE) (COMMERCIAL BREAK)TAPPER: And we’re back with the Republican presidential debate, just five days before the next primary elections. It is time now for closing statements. Candidates, you will each have one minute. And we’ll start with Governor Kasich.KASICH: Well, I’d like to say to all of you, the American people, I have run an unwavering, positive campaign for president of the United States. I have tried to be positive in such a way as to show my record, my accomplishments, my vision. And I wanted to raise the bar in presidential politics so our kids can take a look at the way you can run for president and you will someday maybe be president of the United States. Sometimes being positive isn’t all that interesting, but it’s very interesting to my family, my children and so many supporters that I meet all across the country and I will continue to run a positive campaign. I can fix the problems in Washington, I’ve done it before. And, in fact, I want to turn power, money and influence back to you, the American people, so that you can be in the schools and on the streets fighting drugs and dealing with the issues of poverty. We can do this together. Allow me to take care of the federal issues when I send the power back and the money and the influence to you and you can strengthen our nation and our neighborhoods and our families. That’s where the spirit and strength of America is. But ask the people — my friends in Illinois and of course, my beloved Buckeyes to consider me on Tuesday and, please, let me have your vote. God bless. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Senator Rubio.RUBIO: It’s great to be here, back at home in Miami. It’s hard to believe that just two decades ago, my father was just a bartender working in the city. And now his son stands on this stage, here, as a candidate for the highest office in the land. My parents never wanted me to go into politics or in particular or anything else. They just wanted me to have the opportunity to live out all the dreams they once had for themselves. And that was possible because America is a special country. But that was not an accident. America is great because each generation before us did what needed to be done. They solved their problems, they confronted their challenges. They embraced their opportunities. And for over two centuries, each generation has left the next better off. And now the moment has arrived for our generation to do our part. And I’m telling you tonight, if you vote for me, here in Florida and everywhere across this country on Tuesday, when I’m elected president, this generation will do it’s part. We will do whatever it takes to ensure that our children inherit from us, what we inherited from our parents, the single greatest nation in the history of all of mankind. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Senator Cruz.CRUZ: What an incredible nation we have, that the son of a bartender and the son of mailman and the son of a dishwasher and a successful businessman, can all stand on this stage, competing and asking for your support.CRUZ: In just a few months, one of us is going to stand on the debate stage with Hillary Clinton. And the choice we are making today is who will best defend our values? Who will best defend your values and fight for you? I have to tell you, I cannot wait to stand on that stage with Hillary Clinton and say, “Madam Secretary, you are asking for a third term of a failed administration. You are asking for millions more to remain in stagnant jobs; for millions more steelworkers to be out of work; for wages to remain low; for young people not to have a future.” We can do better. We can instead repeal Obamacare, abolish the IRS, unleash millions of jobs, defend the Bill of Rights, defend the Second Amendment and religious liberty, stand with our cops and our firefighters and our soldiers, and we can keep America safe. That’s the choice I will put to her this fall. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: Mr. Trump?TRUMP: Thank you very much. The Republican Party has a great chance to embrace millions of people that it’s never known before. They’re coming by the millions. We should seize that opportunity. These are great people. These are fantastic people. These are people that love our country. These are people that want to see America be great again. These are people that will win us the election and win it easily. These are people that once the election is won will be able to put Supreme Court justices up that will do a fabulous job. Because let me tell you, if we lose this election, you’re going to have three, four or maybe even five justices and this country will never, ever recover. It will take centuries to recover. So I just say embrace these millions of people that now for the first time ever love the Republican Party. And unify. Be smart and unify. (APPLAUSE)TAPPER: And that concludes this 12th Republican presidential debate. We want to thank the candidates, the Republican National Committee, the University of Miami and, of course, each of you for watching. I’m Jake Tapper. Our coverage continues right now with Anderson Cooper. Anderson?Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementMARCH 4, 2016
Following is a transcript of the Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.KELLY: Good evening, and welcome to the fabulous FOX Theatre in downtown Detroit, the site of the 11th Republican presidential debate of the 2016 campaign.KELLY: I’m Megyn Kelly, along with my co-moderators, Bret Baier and Chris Wallace.BAIER: 59 Republican delegates are at stake here in the state of Michigan during next Tuesday’s Republican primary, the biggest prize out of four states holding contests that day. For tonight’s debate we’re partnering with Facebook. The conversation about this election has been intense, as the crowd is here.Since January 1st, 53 million people in the U.S. have been talking about the election on Facebook.WALLACE: Tonight there are just four candidates on this stage. Their position has been determined by their standing in an average of the five most recent national polls as recognized by FOX News, and conducted and released by March 1st. Here they are.Businessman, Donald Trump.(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)Texas Senator, Ted Cruz.(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)Florida Senator, Marco Rubio.Advertisement(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)And, Ohio Governor, John Kasich.(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)KELLY: Tonight’s rules are simple. Up to 60 seconds for each answer, 30 seconds for each follow-up response, and if a candidate goes over the allotted time, you will hear this.Advertisement(BELL RINGING)BAIER: So pleasant.KELLY: Really.BAIER: We have a big crowd here, and while we expect the audience to be enthusiastic and responsive at times... (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)BAIER: ... they may have already been — we also expect them to be respectful, and we want the candidates to get their full time. So, somewhere between a library and a Red Wings game.(LAUGHTER) (CHEERING)BAIER: Am I right? Is that OK?Let’s get started.WALLACE: Mr. Trump, as you may have heard, the 2012 Republican nominee for President, Mitt Romney, had some things to say about you today.He said your domestic policy will lead to recession, he’s said your foreign policy will make us less safe, and then he listed what he said are your personal qualities. Quoting now Romney on Trump, quote, “the bullying, the greed, the showing off, the misogyny, the absurd, third-grade theatrics”.(CHEERING)He challenged you to answer with substance, not insults. How do you answer Mitt Romney, sir?TRUMP: Well look, he was a failed candidate, he should have beaten president Obama very easy.He failed miserably, and it was an embarrassment to everybody, including the Republican party. It looked like he went away on a vacation the last month. So, I don’t take that, and I guess, obviously, he wants to be relevant. He wants to be back in the game.As far as domestic policy and trade which is killing our country, he said free trade and I believe in free trade also. But, if you look at China, and you look Japan, and if you look at Mexico, both at the border, by the way, where they’re killing us.AdvertisementBoth at the border, and with trade — and every other country we do business with we are getting absolutely crushed on trade. And, he said free trade, I say free trade great. But, not when they’re beating us so badly.With China we’re going to lose $505 billion dollars in terms of trades. You just can’t do it.Mexico, $58 billion dollars.Japan, probably about, they don’t know it yet, but about $109 billion dollars.Every country we lose money with. As far as I’m concerned, we’ve got to reduce — we have to redo our trade deals 100 percent. I have the greatest business people in the world lined up to do it. We will make...(BELL RINGING)TRUMP: ... great trade deals.(CHEERING)WALLACE: Mr. Trump, Romney also talked about your position on race, and the controversy over your failure to denounce David Duke on Sunday. You have repeatedly disavowed him since then, but I’d like to go deeper than that. What are your views on the Klu Klux Klan, and white supremacists?TRUMP: I totally disavow the Klu Klux Klan. I totally disavow David Duke. I’ve been doing it now for two weeks, this is your — you’re probably about the 18th person that’s asked me the question. It was very clear, that question was also talked about in the form of groups. Groups, I want to know which groups are you talking about? You have to tell me which groups?Ultimately, he got to the Klu Klux Klan, which obviously I’m going to disavow. And, by the way, if you look on my Twitter account, almost immediately after the program they were disavowed again.You know, it’s amazing. When I do something on Twitter, everybody picks it up, goes all over the place. But, when I did this one nobody ever picks it up. Take a look at my Twitter account.WALLACE: Thank you, sir.TRUMP: Thank you. Thanks.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Senator Rubio, three weeks ago you said, quote: “I don’t do the personal attacks, primarily because it’s not who I am, because I think it’s beneath the office that I’m seeking but also because I don’t want to embarrass my kids.”AdvertisementBut in the past week you’ve mocked Mr. Trump’s tan. You’ve made fun of his spelling. You called him a con artist. You suggested he wet himself backstage at the last debate, along with other vulgar jokes and jabs. So what happened?RUBIO: Yes, you know, Bret, let me say something. This campaign for the last year Donald Trump has basically mocked everybody with personal attacks. He has done so to people that are sitting on the stage today. He has done so about people that are disabled. He has done it about every candidate in this race.So if there is anyone who has ever deserved to be attacked that way, it has been Donald Trump, for the way he has treated people in the campaign.Now that said, I would much prefer to have a policy debate. I hope that’s what we will have here tonight. Let’s have a policy debate...TRUMP: And we will.RUBIO: ... let’s talk about Donald Trump’s strategy and my strategy and Ted’s strategy and John Kasich’s strategy when it comes to ISIS. And on health care and on the important issues facing this country.But let’s be honest too about all this. The media has given these personal attacks that Donald Trump has made an incredible amount of coverage. Let’s start talking again about the issues that matter to this country. I’m ready to do that starting right here right now tonight.BAIER: Mr. Trump, your response?TRUMP: Well, I also happened to call him a lightweight, OK? And I have said that. So I would like to take that back. He is really not that much of a lightweight. And as far as — and I have to say this, I have to say this. He hit my hands. Nobody has ever hit my hands. I have never heard of this. Look at those hands. Are they small hands?(LAUGHTER)TRUMP: And he referred to my hands, if they are small, something else must be small. I guarantee you there is no problem. I guarantee.AdvertisementBAIER: OK. Moving on.KELLY: OK, Senator Cruz, you say that you are the true conservative in this race. But 15 states have voted now, and you have won only four of them. You have lost repeatedly with what is supposed to be your core voter groups, including evangelicals and conservatives.Hasn’t your brand of conservatism been rejected by an electorate that appears to be more taken with Mr. Trump’s populist message?CRUZ: Well, Megyn, you know, at the end of the day for the folks at home, this is not about the insults back and forth between the candidates. This is not about what attacks we can throw at each other. This is the people at home who are struggling through seven years of Barack Obama.This is the single moms who are working two and three jobs, 28, 29 hours a week because their hours have been forcibly reduced because of Obamacare. This is the truck drivers and the steel workers and the mechanics with calluses on their hands who have seen their wages not grow year after year after year while the cost of living goes up.This is all the young people coming out of school with student loans up to their eyeballs that aren’t able to find a job.And I don’t think the people of America are interested in a bunch of bickering school children. They are interested in solutions, not slogans. It’s easy to say, make things better, make things great. You can even print it and put it on a baseball cap.But the question is, do you understand the principles that made America great in the first place? As president, I will repeal every word of Obamacare. I will pull back the regulators that are killing small businesses.And we will pass a simple flat tax and abolish the IRS. And what that’s going to do, Megyn, is small businesses are going to explode. We are going to see millions of high-paying jobs. We are going to see wages going up. We are going to see opportunity.AdvertisementThat’s where our focus needs to be. That’s where my focus is. And that is why our campaign is the only campaign that over and over again has beaten Donald Trump to date, and it’s why we are the one campaign that going forward can and will beat Donald Trump in this election.KELLY: Go ahead, Mr. Trump. TRUMP: I have heard Ted say that over and over again on television, that he is the only one that can beat me. Just, for the record, I have won 10. He has won three or four. Last week, in fact, on Tuesday, I was a half a million votes higher than him. I was a million votes higher than Marco, 1 million votes. That’s a lot of votes. And was by far in first place.So I keep hearing that he is the only one that can beat me but he is getting beaten very, very badly. So where does this come from? Where does it come from?KELLY: Go ahead, Senator Rubio.RUBIO: Yes, I would just say a couple of things. There is no doubt that Donald has done well in these elections. There is no doubt about that. The numbers are there.Here is what the numbers also say. Two-thirds of the people who have cast a vote in a Republican primary or caucus have voted against you. They do not want you to be our nominee.RUBIO: And, the reason why is because we are not going to turn over the conservative movement, or the party of Lincoln or Reagan, for example, to someone whose positions are not conservative. To someone who last week defended Planned Parenthood for 30 seconds a debate stage. To someone, for example, that has no ideas on foreign — someone who thinks the nuclear triad is a rock band from the 1980’s.TRUMP: Oh yeah, you’re...RUBIO: ... To someone who time and again on issue after issue has not proven that he has the principals...(BELL RINGING)RUBIO: ... That outline what the conservative movement has been about. And, as Ted said, the things that made America great.America is great because of the conservative principles of limited government and free enterprise, and a strong national defense...AdvertisementKELLY: ... OK...RUBIO: ... And, our nominee needs to be someone that stands by those things...KELLY: ... Alright...RUBIO: ... Donald has not demonstrated that.KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump, and then we’re going to have to go to Governor Kasich.(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: Very nice words, but happens to be wrong. CNN just came out with a poll two days ago that...RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)TRUMP: ... That national poll — excuse me...RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)TRUMP: ... The national poll — a national poll where he’s at 15, he’s at 14... RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)...TRUMP: ... And, I’m at 49, so when he says 75 percent, that would mean that 80 percent of the people don’t dig you, and I’m back down to 50...RUBIO: ... Of all the people on this stage, he performs the worst against Hillary Clinton.TRUMP: Wrong...RUBIO: ... If you’re our nominee, we will lose...TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton. I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls...RUBIO: ... You lose by (INAUDIBLE) points (ph). She will wipe you out.TRUMP: I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls...AdvertisementRUBIO: If you’re our nominee (INAUDIBLE)...KELLY: ... Hold on, Senator, hold on...TRUMP: ... I think I’m talking...RUBIO: ... Oh, excuse me (INAUDIBLE)...TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton...KELLY: ... Hold on, hold on, hold on...TRUMP: ... I hope you think (INAUDIBLE)...KELLY: ... The audience cannot understand when you’re talking over each other. Finish your point, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls. The Cue (ph) poll just came out. I beat Hillary Clinton in a recent Fox poll, I beat Hillary Clinton in USA Today, I beat her today in a poll in Ohio. I beat — I’m the only one that beats Hillary Clinton.I beat — and I have not started on Hillary yet. Believe me, I will...(CHEERING)TRUMP: ... start soon. I haven’t even started.KELLY: OK.BAIER: Governor Kasich, today you admitted that you have a narrow path to the nomination through a contested convention. Today also Mitt Romney proposed that Republicans should vote for Senator Rubio in Florida. They should vote for you in Ohio. They should vote for Senator Cruz in states that he can beat Mr. Trump to prevent Mr. Trump from getting the nomination.So, do you buy Romney’s blueprint, and can you say tonight to your Florida supporters that they should vote for Senator Rubio to get a contested convention?KASICH: You know, this so much about process. It frankly is boring to me. I would like it clear though, since we’re talking about polls, I beat Hillary Clinton by more than 11 points, and the reason it happens...Advertisement(CHEERING)TRUMP: ... In one poll...KASICH: ... The reason it happens...TRUMP: ... In one poll...KASICH: ... You know, the reason is because, as the Democrats tell me all the time, I can get the crossover votes. You see, because throughout this campaign I’ve talked about issues, I have never tried to go and get into these scrums that we’re seeing here on the stage. And, people say everywhere I go, “you seem to be the adult on the stage.”(APPLAUSE)In terms of — you know, Mitt Romney’s a great guy, but he doesn’t determine my strategy. The fact of the matter is I’m running for president because I worked hard to fix this country when I was in Washington as the Chairman of the Budget Committee where we had some of the most significant job growth after we balanced the budget.We had wages going up, it was very successful in Ohio. Our wages grow faster than the national average. We’re up over 400,000 jobs. We paid down, back in the old days, they paid down half a trillion dollars of the national debt. It’s a formula that works. And, I believe that formula will work when I return to Washington as the president.And, by the way, I won’t need on the job training because I know how to do all of this, and within the first 100 days I will have a plan that will pass the Congress because...(BELL RINGING)KASICH: ... It is reasonable, and I can bring both sides together...(APPLAUSE)BAIER: ... But Governor, this is all about process. For voters, they need to see a path to get to the nomination if they’re going to support you.On Super Tuesday you finished in single digits in nine out of 11 states. So, you can see that your path is through a contested convention. How do you...KASICH: ... Well, Bret, I think we’re all really there. I mean, the simple fact is that, you know, you all wrote me off. You wrote me off before I even got to New Hampshire, then when I finished in New Hampshire you wrote me off in the South, then you wrote me off in Super Tuesday.I split delegates in Vermont with Donald Trump, I finished second in Massachusetts, and we won delegates in Virginia. But, guess what? It’s now March Madness and we’re heading up North to the place — to my turf, OK?Advertisement(CHEERING)KASICH: And, let me just tell you this, I will win Ohio, and I am going to move all across this country, and over time as people begin to finally hear my message — you know what people say, Bret, to me all the time?Why don’t they give you any time on the debate stage? Why is that?(CHEERING)KASICH: So now all of a sudden, I’m starting to get it, and what I want the people to know is, I know how to bring people together, Republicans and Democrats. I have successfully, both at the federal level and the state level brought economic growth, wage growth, and economic security to this country.And I want to go back and do it again, and I’m going to keep talking about my message of bringing people together and motivating people in the neighborhoods that realize they don’t need somebody from Washington galloping in. There are many things they can do where they live, because the strength of our country is in our neighborhoods and our families. And I’m going to keep doing this.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Thank you.WALLACE: Well, then, we want to focus now on the economy, which is one of the top issues on Facebook, with 6.6 million people discussing it online. A lot of that conversation is happening here in Detroit, where the unemployment rate is 10.9 percent. That’s more than double the national average.Senator Rubio, you have taken to calling Mr. Trump a con artist who portrays himself as a hero to working people while he’s really been, in your words, “sticking it” to the American workers for 40 years. But he has built a big company that employs thousands of people. Question. How many jobs have you created?RUBIO: Well, first of all, government doesn’t...(AUDIENCE BOOS)First of all, Chris, my point is exactly right. He has spent a career of convincing Americans that he’s something that he’s not in exchange for their money. Now he’s trying to do the same in exchange for their country. This is a fact. He talks about these great businesses that he’s built. He inherited over $100 million.TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.RUBIO: And with that money, he lost more money than he made.WALLACE: Mr. Trump, it’s not your turn. You’ll get your turn, sir.(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: He can start tonight by announcing that all the Donald Trump clothing will no longer be made in China and in Mexico, but will be made here in the United States.Advertisement(APPLAUSE)And on the issue of job creation, I find this interesting. The private sector creates jobs. The jobs of those of us in public service are to put in place policies that allow the economy to grow.That’s the problem with the Democratic Party. They think government is what creates jobs. Government does not create jobs.Now, the way you create jobs is you make America the easiest and the best place in the world to start a business or to expand an existing business. If you go on my website, marcorubio.com, you will see a real plan to fix our taxes, to roll back regulations, to repeal and replace Obamacare, not just lines around the states. Serious policies and proposals.WALLACE: Sir? Mr. Trump, I’d like you to respond. You have 30 seconds to respond. But as part of that, could you respond to his specific assertion about Trump Collection clothes, which you say some of it is made in Mexico?TRUMP: This little guy has lied so much...RUBIO: Here we go.TRUMP: ... about my record.RUBIO: Here we go. It’s personal.(AUDIENCE BOOS)(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: He has lied so much about my record.WALLACE: Mr. Rubio — Senator Rubio, why don’t you let him finish?TRUMP: And I will tell you this. First of all, I got a call from my sister and brother tonight, and they said we had no idea Dad gave you $200 million. Believe me, I started off with $1 million. I built a company that’s worth more than $10 billion. And I say it not in a bragging way, but that’s the kind of thinking we need.Very low debt, tremendous cash flow. My financials are all — they’re all in there with the federal elections. You’ve seen them. Everybody has seen them. I say it only because that’s the kind of thinking this country needs with $19 trillion in debit. Believe me.Advertisement(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: But wait one second. Specifically and quickly on the question, will you promise that you will — and how soon will you move your clothing collection, the clothes that are made in China and Mexico?TRUMP: They devalue their currencies. I will do that. And by the way, I have been doing it more and more. But they devalue their currencies, in particular China. Mexico is doing a big number now, also. Japan is unbelievable what they’re doing.They devalue their currencies, and they make it impossible for clothing-makers in this country to do clothing in this country. And if you look at what’s happened on Seventh Avenue, and you look at what’s happened in New York with the garment industry, so much of the clothing now comes out from Vietnam, China, and other places. And it’s all because of devaluation.By the way, the Trans-Pacific, if you look at the TPP, a total disaster, which, by the way, Marco is in favor of, they need — it is a disaster for our country. It’s trying to be approved by various people, including President Obama. And I’ll tell you something. The biggest problem with that is: They don’t take into concurrence the devaluation. They’re devaluing their currency.WALLACE: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Trump. Senator Rubio?TRUMP: And they’re killing — they’re going to...(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: Wait, wait, Senator Rubio.RUBIO: The answer is, he’s not going to do it. And you know why? Because there are plenty of clothing makers in America.(APPLAUSE)(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: If you go on my website, marcorubio.com, everything we have on there is made in America. The reason why he makes it in China or Mexico is because he can make more money on it. That’s why he’s doing it.And the second point, you see what happens, again, when you challenge him on a policy issue. You asked him about the economy, and the first thing he does is launch an attack about some little guy thing. Because he doesn’t have answers.AdvertisementTRUMP: No, no. I have very good answers.RUBIO: And he’s asking us to make him the president of the United States of America.(CROSSTALK) (APPLAUSE)RUBIO: This is not a game.TRUMP: I know what’s happening with the economy. You don’t know a thing.RUBIO: Well, then answer the economy question.TRUMP: You haven’t employed in your life one person.RUBIO: But he doesn’t answer the employment question.TRUMP: I have employed tens of thousands of people.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: You haven’t employed one person.RUBIO: You ever heard of Trump Steaks? You ever heard of Trump Vodka?TRUMP: Oh, you know what? You know what? Take a look at Trump Steaks.RUBIO: All of these companies he has ruined.TRUMP: By the way, that’s the other thing...RUBIO: Trump Steaks is gone. You have ruined these companies.TRUMP: Mitt Romney...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: ... false, totally false. And now the funny thing is he didn’t talk about the hundreds of really successful jobs, the buildings all over the world that have made a fortune.The Times reporter Nick Corasaniti discusses key moments from the Republican presidential debate on Thursday in Detroit, as the field of candidates narrowed to a four-man race.(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: I have a policy question for you, sir.RUBIO: Let’s see if he answers it.TRUMP: I will. Don’t worry about it, Marco. Don’t worry about it. Don’t worry about it little Marco, I will.AdvertisementRUBIO: All right, well, let’s hear it big Donald.TRUMP: Don’t worry about it, little Marco.(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: Gentlemen. Gentlemen.(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: You have got to do better than this. TRUMP: This guy has a number one — the number one absentee record in the United States...WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I would like to ask you a policy question.TRUMP: He doesn’t show up to vote.WALLACE: Your proposed tax cut...TRUMP: That’s why the people in Florida do not like him.WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your proposed tax cut would add $10 trillion to the nation’s debt over 10 years, even if the economy grows the way that you say it will. You insist that you could make up for a good deal of that, you say, by cutting waste, fraud, and abuse.TRUMP: Correct.WALLACE: Like what? And please be specific.TRUMP: Department of Education. We’re cutting Common Core. We’re getting rid of Common Core. We’re bringing education locally. Department of Environmental Protection. We are going to get rid are of it in almost every form. We’re going to have little tidbits left but we’re going to take a tremendous amount out.We have various other things. If you look at the IRS, if you look at every single agency, we can cut it down, and I mean really cut it down and save. The waste, fraud, and abuse is massive.Larry Kudlow, great guy, everybody respects him, said my plan for taxes and tax cutting is the best by far of everybody.WALLACE: But, Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump, your numbers don’t add up. Please put up full screen number four. The Education Department, you talk about cutting, the total budget for the education department is $78 billion.AdvertisementAnd that includes Pell grants for low-income students and aid to states for special education. I assume you wouldn’t cut those things. The entire budget for the EPA, the Environmental Protection Agency, $8 billion.TRUMO: OK.WALLACE: The deficit this year is $544 billion. That’s more than a half trillion dollars. Your numbers don’t add up, sir.TRUMP: Let me explain something. Because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies — because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies are not mandated to bid properly, they have hundreds of billions of dollars in waste.We don’t bid properly. We don’t have proper bidding procedures. The reason we don’t is because they take care of all of the senators, all of the congressman, and they don’t bid. They don’t go out to bid. WALLACE: Mr. Trump...TRUMP: Take a look — excuse me. You are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars...WALLACE: No, you are not.TRUMP: ... if we went out to the proper bid. Of course you are.WALLACE: No, you’re not, sir. Let’s put up full screen number 2.You say that Medicare could save $300 billion a year negotiating lower drug prices. But Medicare total only spends $78 billion a year on drugs. Sir, that’s the facts. You are talking about saving more money on Medicare prescription drugs...TRUMP: I’m saying saving through negotiation throughout the economy, you will save $300 billion a year.AdvertisementWALLACE: But that doesn’t really cut the federal deficit.TRUMP: And that’s a huge — of course it is. We are going to buy things for less money. Of course it is. That works out...WALLACE: That’s the only money that we buy — the only drugs that we pay for is through Medicare.TRUMP: I’m not only talking about drugs, I’m talking about other things. We will save $300 billion a year if we properly negotiate. We don’t do that. We don’t negotiate. We don’t negotiate anything.KASICH: Can I...WALLACE: No. I promise I will get to you in a moment, sir.Senator Cruz, one of centerpieces of your campaign, in fact, you mentioned it again tonight, is that you will abolish the IRS. Question though, who will collect the taxes that you are still calling for? Who will oversee to make sure that people pay the taxes that they rightfully owe? And who will check on the various tax deductions and tax credits that you still want?CRUZ: So my simple flat tax I have rolled out in precise detail how it will operate where every American can fill out our taxes on a postcard. And if you want to actually see the postcard, see all the details, you can find them on our Web site. It’s tedcruz.org.When he we get rid of all the corporate welfare, all the subsidies, all the carve-outs in the IRS code, it dramatically simplifies it. And under Obama, the IRS has become so corrupt and so politicized we need to abolish it all together.Now, at the end of that there will still be an office in the Treasury Department to receive the postcards but it will be dramatically simpler. CRUZ: And let me take a moment, Chris, to go back to go back to this exchange that was going on.In between all of the insults, let me point out the specificity that was lacking. It’s very easy to say, “Let’s cut waste, fraud, and abuse.” I’ve rolled out a detailed plan to cut $500 billion in federal spending, specifying exactly what I would cut.(APPLAUSE)It’s easy to say it, but one of the great disconnects to all the people, all of the voters, I understand the folks who are supporting Donald right now. You’re angry. You’re angry at Washington, and he uses angry rhetoric.But for 40 years, Donald has been part of the corruption in Washington that you’re angry about.(APPLAUSE)And you’re not going to stop the corruption in Washington by supporting someone who has supported liberal Democrats for four decades, from Jimmy Carter to John Kerry to Hillary Clinton. You’re not going to stop the corruption and the cronyism by supporting someone who has used government power for private gain. Instead, we need a president who stands with the American people.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Governor Kasich, I promise I will get to you. But you do get 30 seconds to respond, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: Well, all of a sudden, I hear for 40 years I’ve been involved in Washington. I have been supporting people for many years. And these people have been politicians, and they’ve been on both sides, Democrats, Republicans, liberals, conservatives. I’ve supported everybody, because, until recently, I wasn’t a politician, and I hope maybe you don’t all consider me a politician right now. I hate the term politician.But I’ve been supporting politicians. A recent article somewhere said Donald Trump is a world-class businessman who goes out and he does get along with everybody. I’ve supported Democrats, and I’ve supported Republicans. And as a businessman, I owed that to my company, to my family, to my workers, to everybody to get along.Part of the problem we have in Washington, Chris...WALLACE: Mr. Trump...TRUMP: ... is it’s total gridlock. Nobody gets along. We need people to get along. We need to be able to get things done.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Governor Kasich, Democrats, as you know, will make income inequality a big issue in the general election. You support raising the minimum wage, although you say not to the $15 an hour that Democrats are talking about. Mr. Trump opposes any increase because he says it will price American workers out of the world market. Is he wrong about that? No increase in the minimum wage?KASICH: Well, well, wait a minute, first of all, I didn’t say I was for an increase in the federal minimum wage. I said in Ohio we increased it modestly every single year. So I’m not for a federal minimum wage increase.WALLACE: But you did talk about states doing it.KASICH: Well, states — if states want to do it, they ought to sit down with businesspeople and the lawmakers and figure out what will work. But hold on a second here with everything else.I’m the only person on this stage who actually was the chief architect of balancing the federal budget. It’s not a theory for me. It’s not — it’s not some — you have to know how to put everything together. And you know, I spent 10 years of my life to get there, and I did not do that because I’m worshiping at some balanced budget shrine.The reason I did it is when you have commonsense regulations, lower taxes on individuals and businesses, and you have a fiscal plan that makes sense, the job creators will expand employment. And what happened? When I was there, the jobs were exploding. Bill Clinton’s tried to take credit for it. When I went to Ohio, we’re up 400,000 jobs. It’s the same formula.But it isn’t easy. I fought the entire Washington establishment and won, because when you balance a budget, you must affect every single thing. Everything in the federal government specifically. You cannot get there with theories or broad statements, and you have to be willing to take the heat. In fact, I fought a Republican president, who I thought was not offering constructive proposals to fix this economy.So when we talk about all this, there’s one person on this stage and one person who’s been a candidate for president in either party that restored economic strength, growth, a balanced budget, paid down debt, cut taxes, the things that people in this country want. No theories. Reality.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Thank you, Governor.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: All right. Let’s talk immigration for a little bit. Senator Cruz, let’s start with you. You have repeatedly touted how you have stood shoulder to shoulder with Senator Jeff Sessions to fight illegal immigration and amnesty. But Senator Sessions just endorsed Donald Trump. If voters want Jeff Sessions-style immigration policies, isn’t their choice rather clear?CRUZ: Yes, their choice is very clear. If you look to the actual record — you know, Donald mentioned a moment ago that he was just doing business when he was writing checks to liberal Democrats. But that’s not, in fact, the checks he was writing.Listen, we could all understand if you write a check to a city commission because you’re looking for a zoning waiver on building a building. That may be corrupt, but you could understand real estate developers doing that.CRUZ: That’s not what Donald Trump did. Donald Trump supported Jimmy Carter over Ronald Reagan. Donald supported John Kerry over George W. Bush. If you don’t like Obamacare, Donald Trump funded Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi taking over Congress to pass Obamacare.On immigration, if you don’t like amnesty, if you don’t like the Gang of Eight, Donald Trump funded five of the eight members of the Gang of Eight $50,000.And let’s talk about this election. The choice Republican primary voters are making is who is best prepared to stand up to Hillary Clinton and beat Hillary Clinton. Donald Trump has written checks to Hillary Clinton not once, not twice, not three times. Ten times. And four of those checks were not to her Senate campaign. It wasn’t that she was the New York senator and it was a cost of doing business. It was to her presidential campaign.Donald Trump in 2008 wrote four checks to elect Hillary Clinton as president.KELLY: OK.CRUZ: So I’d like to ask Donald, why did you write checks to Hillary Clinton to be president in 2008? It wasn’t for business. And how can you stand on a debate stage now with her and say you don’t think she should be president?(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: Actually, it was for business. It was. It was. It was for business. I pride myself, including outside of the United States. I’m doing almost 120 deals outside of the — which I hope to be able to stop very soon and let my children handle it — but we’re doing many, many deals outside of the United States.I support politicians. In 2008, I supported Hillary Clinton. I supported many other people, by the way. And that was because of the fact that I’m in business. I did support very heavily Ronald Reagan. I also supported George Bush, by the way.KELLY: All right. Mr. Trump...CRUZ: But what would you say...KELLY: Well, stand by — stand by, Senator Cruz.CRUZ: ... to Hillary Clinton on the debate stage when you wrote her a check in 2008, wrote her four checks to be president?TRUMP: Let me tell you, something, Ted. The last person that Hillary Clinton wants to face is Donald Trump. That I can...(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Let’s move on. And with all due respect, we have — we have questions. We have questions.TRUMP: That I can tell you.(CROSSTALK)KELLY: No, no, no. Hold on. Hold on. We can do more of this later. Mr. Trump, hi.TRUMP: Hello.KELLY: How are you doing?TRUMP: Nice to be with you, Megyn.KELLY: Great to have you here.TRUMP: You’re looking well. You’re looking well.KELLY: As are you.(APPLAUSE)Back in January, you gave an off-the-record interview to the New York Times. It was apparently audiotaped. Now, a recent report in Buzzfeed citing sources at the Times reports that in that interview you expressed flexibility when it comes to your immigration policy, specifically with respect to your promise to deport the 11 million people who are now living here illegally. You have suggested that you may have expressed some flexibility when it comes to the size of the wall that you want to build. But did you tell them, specifically, that you are flexible when it comes to your deportation plan?TRUMP: I don’t know exactly what — when you talk about off the record. First of all, Buzzfeed? They were the ones that said under no circumstances will I run for president. And were they wrong. But a lot of people said that.Then, I did have a meeting with the editorial board of the New York Times, a very nice meeting. Many of those things were off the record, I think at their suggestion and my suggestion. And I think being off the record is a very important thing. I think it’s a very, very powerful thing.And I will say this. These three gentlemen have gone off the record many times with reporters. And I think they want to honor it, and I would always honor that.I will say, though, in terms of immigration — and almost anything else — there always has to be some, you know, tug and pull and deal. And, you know, when I watch Ted stand on the Senate floor, I had great respect for what he did. He stood there for a day-and-a- half or something. In the meantime, what came of it? Nothing. You have to be able to have some flexibility, some negotiation.Now, sometimes you ask for more than you want and you negotiate down to the point. I may have discussed something like that with the New York Times, but I would never release off-the-record conversations. I don’t think it’s fair, frankly, to do that to anybody.KELLY: How flexible are you on this issue?(AUDIENCE BOOS)TRUMP: Not very flexible. No, not very flexible. I give the example — I’m going to build a wall. I’m the one that wants the wall. I’m the one that can build the wall.(APPLAUSE)It’s going to get built. And by the way, Mexico is going to pay for the wall. I can tell you that. Mexico is going to pay for the wall.(APPLAUSE)But — and I used an example. And this isn’t necessarily what was said, but whatever was said, the wall’s 50 feet high. Is it going to be 45 feet or 40 feet? That could very well be. That could very well — he wants it to be higher.(LAUGHTER)That could very well be. But there’s always give and take. There’s always negotiation. And the best negotiator that knows what he’s doing will make a great deal. But we need give and take in government. If you don’t have give and take, you’re never going to agree on anything.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Senator Rubio, you not only supported the failed immigration reform effort through the Gang of Eight, but you’re still on record as favoring an eventual path to citizenship for those who are here illegally. And in addition...(AUDIENCE BOOS)... you favored in-state tuition for Florida illegal immigrants. You’ve been hitting Mr. Trump hard on this flexibility discussion with the New York Times, but his supporters might say at least his opening stance was tough.RUBIO: Well, first of all, let me say that on the issue of the off-the-record, that’s not up to the New York Times. That’s up to you, Donald. If tonight you tell the New York Times to release the audio, they will do it, and we can exactly see what your true views are on immigration...TRUMP: Fine (ph).RUBIO: ... because it is a major issue, in your campaign that you’ve made a center issue. Now, as far as my record on it is concerned, I absolutely want to solve this issue. And I did the best we could in a Senate that was controlled by liberal Democrats and Harry Reid in the hopes that the House, made up of conservatives, would take it up and make it even stronger. And I said that repeatedly at the time.I’m not just saying that now; I said it throughout that process. We do need to do with this issue. (AUDIENCE BOOS)RUBIO: When I’m president it will not be dealt with the way it was done in the Senate.It will be done first and foremost by bringing illegal immigration under control and proving it to the American people. And only after that is done can anything else happen.And it will be something the American people support. We’ll see what they are willing to support. It’s not going to be an executive order and we’re not going to ram it down their throats.KELLY: Mr. Trump, we will let respond, but will you release the tapes? Will you authorize of The Times to release the tapes?TRUMP: I will say one thing, what Marco said is — I understand it. He is talking about a little give and take and a little negotiation. And you know what? That’s OK. That’s not the worst thing in the world.There is nothing wrong with that. I happen to be much stronger on illegal immigration. Sheriff Joe Arpaio endorsed me. And if he endorses you, believe me, you are the strongest, from Arizona.But give and take is OK. And I thought what he said is OK. We may differ on the degree. But what he said to me is OK.KELLY: Will you release the tapes?TRUMP: No. I never do that. I would not do that. I don’t think — I have too much respect — if I deal with you off the record, if I deal with Bret or Chris off the record, I have too much respect for that process to say, just release everything. I would not do that.KELLY: OK. Stand by. We’re going to continue this right after the break. We have more.BAIER: Coming up, more with Megyn on immigration, plus questions on other top issues, including the war on terror. The “FOX News Republican Presidential Debate Live from Detroit” continues after a quick break.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)KELLY: Welcome back everybody to the FOX News Republican presidential debate, live from the FOX theater here in Detroit. Let’s get back now to the questions.Mr. Trump, your campaign website to this day argues that more visas for highly skilled workers would, quote, “decimate American workers”. However, at the CNBC debate, you spoke enthusiastically in favor of these visas. So, which is it?TRUMP: I’m changing. I’m changing. We need highly skilled people in this country, and if we can’t do it, we’ll get them in. But, and we do need in Silicon Valley, we absolutely have to have.So, we do need highly skilled, and one of the biggest problems we have is people go to the best colleges. They’ll go to Harvard, they’ll go to Stanford, they’ll go to Wharton, as soon as they’re finished they’ll get shoved out. They want to stay in this country. They want to stay here desperately, they’re not able to stay here. For that purpose, we absolutely have to be able to keep the brain power in this country.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: So you abandoning the position on your website...TRUMP: ... I’m changing it, and I’m softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.KELLY: And you’re not releasing the discussion with the New York Times behind closed doors...TRUMP: ... That is correct.KELLY: Which will have some asking whether, on your immigration policies, you’re really just playing to people’s fantasies, which is a tactic...TRUMP: ... No, I’m not playing.KELLY: ... you praised in your book, The Art of the Deal.TRUMP: I’m not playing to anybody’s fantasies, I’m playing to the fact that our country is in trouble, that we have a tremendous problem with crime. The border is a disaster, it’s like a piece of Swiss cheese. We’re going to stop it, we’re going to stop people from coming into our country illegally. We’re going to stop it.(APPLAUSE) (CHEERING)KELLY: Senator Cruz, not long ago you propose quintupling the number of these foreign worker visas. After you announced for president, you reversed yourself, citing reports that the program was being abused. But, that abuse had been around long before your 180. In fact, it was so bad that just a few months earlier that a bipartisan group of senators called for an investigation and you declined to join them.Isn’t it a good thing that the American public didn’t trust Ted on that one?CRUZ: Well, the abuse of the H1-B program has been rampant. On the face of that H1-B abuse, I have proposed, and promised as president that I will impose a 180 day moratorium on the H1B program to implement a comprehensive investigation and audit because you got U.S. companies that are firing American workers, bringing in foreign workers, and forcing them to train their replacements.And, I would note that is not dissimilar to what we discovered at the last debate concerning the hotel that Donald owns down in Florida. Down in Florida that hotel has brought in hundreds of foreign workers, and afterwards it was really striking.I watched the CNN interview Donald did where he explained, he said, well the problem is you can’t find Americans who are qualified, or who want to work as waiters and waitresses. Now, let me ask the people here, how many people have worked as a waiter or waitress?(APPLAUSE)CRUZ: Millions across this country. That is an astonishing statement. You know, Marco’s Dad started as a bartender. My Dad started washing dishes, and yet, you know how many Americans wanted those jobs?(BELL RINGING)CRUZ: Roughly 300 applied, Donald hired 17. And, that’s why this New York Times tape is so troubling because what’s been reported is that Donald told the Editorial Board of the New York Times what I’m saying on immigration, I don’t believe. I’m not going to build a wall, I’m not going to deport people, this is all just rhetoric for the voters.Now, if he didn’t say that, he has an easy solution. Simply release the tape.But, for everyone at home who’s mad at politicians that lied to us, Donald’s record right now as he standing here...KELLY: ... OK.CRUZ: ... His record right now is one of repeatedly hiring illegal aliens...KELLY: ... Times up, sir...CRUZ: ... abusing (ph) American workers...KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: First of all I’ve had tens of thousands of people working for me, most of which are — 98, 97, 98 percent of the people in this country, from this country. I’m very proud of it. You have a club in Palm Beach, Florida called the Mar-a-Lago Club, it’s a very, very successful club. It has a very short season, it’s called, the Season, and it goes from November until March.It’s a few months, five months at the most. People don’t want a short-term job. They don’t want — so, we will bring people in, and we will send the people out. All done legally, all done with the process that’s...(BELL RINGING)TRUMP: ... Approved by government in Palm Beach, or West Palm Beach. We bring people in, we bring them out. We want to hire as many Americans as we can, but they don’t want part-time, very short part-time jobs.KELLY: Understood. Thank you.RUBIO: That’s not accurate. I’m sorry, Megyn, that’s not accurate. That’s my — there were at least 300 Americans that applied last year, none of them were hired. Some of them...TRUMP: ... Wrong...RUBIO: ... have been interviewed...TRUMP: ... That’s wrong.RUBIO: ... They were not hired...TRUMP: ... Wrong...RUBIO: ... And, here’s why he does it this way, let me explain why he (INAUDIBLE) H2-B...TRUMP: ... Wrong...RUBIO: ... Because when you bring them in this way, when you bring someone in on one of these visas they can’t go work for anybody else. They either work for you or they have to go back home. You basically have them captive, so you don’t have to worry about competing for higher wages with another hotel down the street. And, that’s why you bring workers from abroad.You argue that you’re here to fight on behalf of the American worker, but when you have chances to help the American worker... (BELL RINGING)...
 Highlights from the 11th Republican debate.
      

RUBIO: ... but when you have chances to help the American workers, you’re making your clothes overseas and you’re hiring your workers from overseas.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Go ahead, sir.TRUMP: The — the — the other hotels during the season, they do the same thing. They take in a lot of people, because you can’t get them. They take in a lot of people. Long-term employees, we don’t do that, but short-term employees, we have no choice but to do it, and other hotels in that very, very hot area. It is a very hot area.RUBIO: There were Americans in that hot area.TRUMP: It’s very, very hard to get people. But other hotels do the exact same thing. And just so you understand, just again, this is a legal process. This is a procedure. It’s part of the law. I take advantage of that. There’s nothing wrong with it. We have no choice.KELLY: All right.CRUZ: Donald, you could resolve this issue very quickly by simply...(AUDIENCE BOOS)... releasing the New York Times tape. Because, listen, maybe it’s right.TRUMP: This wasn’t on the subject.CRUZ: ... that you didn’t tell them you’re misleading the American people. If that’s the case...TRUMP: Tapes were not on the subject, but that’s...CRUZ: If you didn’t tell them that, the tapes will prove you’re innocent.KELLY: OK.CRUZ: But if, in fact, you went to Manhattan and said I’m lying to the American people, then the voters have a right to know.TRUMP: No, no. You’re the liar. You’re the lying guy up here.(CROSSTALK)CRUZ: Because we’ve been lied to too many times.TRUMP: You’re the — you’re the one. You’re the one.CRUZ: Why don’t you release the tapes? Release the tapes.TRUMP: You’re the one. Now, let me just tell you. Let me just tell you.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: Excuse me. Excuse me. I’ve given my answer, Lyin’ Ted. I’ve given my answer.KELLY: All right. Let’s leave it at that.(AUDIENCE BOOS)Let’s leave it at that. We have more to get to.(AUDIENCE BOOS)BAIER: Gentlemen, the next topic to discuss is terrorism. Senator Rubio, ISIS is a big topic of conversation on Facebook. We have a map that shows the conservation about ISIS around the country. You proposed sending a larger number of American ground troops to help defeat ISIS in Syria and Iraq...RUBIO: That’s correct, and Libya.BAIER: ... but military commanders say the biggest ISIS threat to Europe in particular now is coming from Libya, not Syria.RUBIO: Correct.BAIER: So just to be clear, if you’re for putting more U.S. ground troops in Iraq and Syria, are you also ready to send U.S. ground troops on the ground in Libya?RUBIO: Well, Bret, what I’ve argued from the very beginning is ISIS — in order to defeat ISIS, you must deny them operating spaces. This is how ISIS or any radical group, for that matter, can grow. It’s how Al Qaida was able to carry out 9/11, is that the Taliban gave them an operating space in Afghanistan.Today that operating space has largely been based in Iraq and Syria, but I’ve been warning about the Libyan presence for the better part of two years. So they need to be targeted wherever they have an operating space. They do need to be defeated on the ground by a ground force made up primarily of Sunni Arabs themselves. This is a radical Sunni movement. They can only be defeated if they are driven out and the territory is held by Sunni Arabs. But it will require a specific number of American special operators, in combination with an increase in air strikes. And that will include, if necessary, operating spaces in Libya, which, in fact, they are using to project into the Sinai against Egypt and ultimately into Europe, as well.BAIER: Governor Kasich, would you put ground troops in Libya?KASICH: Well, first of all, just to be clear, not only did I serve for 18 years on the Defense Committee, more than anybody on this stage, but, secondly, I was called into the Pentagon after 9/11 to help Secretary Rumsfeld with some of his difficulties.I will say, look, let me tell you what happened with Libya. And I pointed out in the last debate — Hillary Clinton worked aggressively to depose Moammar Gadhafi. We had no business doing it. He was working with us. He was cooperating with us. He denuclearized. And now they pushed him out, and now we have a fertile ground for ISIS.Fortunately in Libya, there’s only a few cities on the coast, because most of Libya is a desert. The fact of the matter is, we absolutely have to be — and not just with special forces. I mean, that’s not going to work. Come on. You’ve got to go back to the invasion when we pushed Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. We have to be there on the ground in significant numbers. We do have to include our Muslim Arab friends to work with us on that. And we have to be in the air.And we — it should be a broad coalition, made up of the kinds of people that were involved when we defeated Saddam. Now, you’ve got to be on the ground and in the air both in Syria and Iraq. And at some point, we will have to deal with Libya. I am very concerned about ISIS getting their hands on the oilfields in Libya and being able to fund their operations. The fact is cool, calm, deliberate, effective, take care of the job, and then come home. That’s what we need to do with our military foreign policy.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Mr. Trump, just yesterday, almost 100 foreign policy experts signed on to an open letter refusing to support you, saying your embracing expansive use of torture is inexcusable. General Michael Hayden, former CIA director, NSA director, and other experts have said that when you asked the U.S. military to carry out some of your campaign promises, specifically targeting terrorists’ families, and also the use of interrogation methods more extreme than waterboarding, the military will refuse because they’ve been trained to turn down and refuse illegal orders.So what would you do, as commander-in-chief, if the U.S. military refused to carry out those orders?TRUMP: They won’t refuse. They’re not going to refuse me. Believe me.BAIER: But they’re illegal.TRUMP: Let me just tell you, you look at the Middle East. They’re chopping off heads. They’re chopping off the heads of Christians and anybody else that happens to be in the way. They’re drowning people in steel cages. And he — now we’re talking about waterboarding.This really started with Ted, a question was asked of Ted last — two debates ago about waterboarding. And Ted was, you know, having a hard time with that question, to be totally honest with you. They then came to me, what do you think of waterboarding? I said it’s fine. And if we want to go stronger, I’d go stronger, too, because, frankly...(APPLAUSE)... that’s the way I feel. Can you imagine — can you imagine these people, these animals over in the Middle East, that chop off heads, sitting around talking and seeing that we’re having a hard problem with waterboarding? We should go for waterboarding and we should go tougher than waterboarding. That’s my opinion.BAIER: But targeting terrorists’ families?(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: And — and — and — I’m a leader. I’m a leader. I’ve always been a leader. I’ve never had any problem leading people. If I say do it, they’re going to do it. That’s what leadership is all about.BAIER: Even targeting terrorists’ families?TRUMP: Well, look, you know, when a family flies into the World Trade Center, a man flies into the World Trade Center, and his family gets sent back to where they were going — and I think most of you know where they went — and, by the way, it wasn’t Iraq — but they went back to a certain territory, they knew what was happening. The wife knew exactly what was happening.They left two days early, with respect to the World Trade Center, and they went back to where they went, and they watched their husband on television flying into the World Trade Center, flying into the Pentagon, and probably trying to fly into the White House, except we had some very, very brave souls on that third plane. All right?(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Senator Cruz, you were mentioned.TRUMP: I have no problem with it.BAIER: Senator Cruz?CRUZ: Bret, you know, I think the American people understand that yelling and cursing at people doesn’t make you a tough guy. We need a commander-in-chief that, number one, will rebuild the military, just like Ronald Reagan did in 1981 coming out of the weak Jimmy Carter administration. He passed tax reform and regulatory reform. The economy took off. It generated millions in high-paying jobs, trillions in new revenue. He rebuilt the military, bankrupted the Soviet Union, and won the Cold War.As president, I will do the exact same thing with radical Islamic terrorism. We will rebuild this military so that it remains the mightiest fighting force on the face of the planet. And then, when I am commander-in-chief, every militant on the face of the Earth will understand that if they go and join ISIS, if they wage jihad against the United States of America, they are signing their death warrant.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: But, Senator Cruz, in 2013, you said you were open — you were open to the possibility that Edward Snowden had performed a considerable public service, you said back then, in revealing certain aspects of the NSA procedures. Many of your colleagues in the Senate, including Senator Rubio, called him a traitor. It took you until January of this year to call him a traitor and say he should be tried for treason. Why the change of heart? And why did it take you so long?CRUZ: Well, Bret, as someone who spent much of his life in law enforcement, I believe you should start with the facts and evidence first before ending up with the verdict. When the news first broke of the United States government engaging in massive surveillance on American citizens, that was a very troubling development, and it’s why the United States Congress acted to correct it.Now, at the same time, I said in that initial statement that if the evidence indicated that Edward Snowden violated the law, he should be prosecuted for violating the law. And, indeed, since then, the evidence is clear that not only does Snowden violate the law, but it appears he committed treason. Treason is defined under the Constitution as giving aid and comfort to the enemies of America, and what Snowden did made it easier for terrorists to avoid detection.And Snowden’s comments afterwards, and his behavior afterwards, he fled to Russia, he fled to China. His conducts afterwards indicates that he was not a whistleblower, but instead he was undermining the ability to defend this country. But we need a president who isn’t rash, who doesn’t just pop off at the — at the hip, but waits to see what the facts are and then acts to defend this country.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Mr. Trump, you’ve repeatedly deflected calls for specific national security or defense policy plans with the claim that you’ll ask the best people when you become president, and take their advice.So who are the best people? Can you reveal two or three names that you trust for national security?TRUMP: I think Richard Haass is excellent. I have a lot of respect for him. I think General Keane is excellent. I think that there are — I like Colonel Jacobs very much. I see him. I know him. I have many people that I think are really excellent but in the end it’s going to be my decision.When you just asked the question about Snowden, I will tell you right from the beginning, I said he was a spy and we should get him back. And if Russia respected our country, they would have sent him back immediately, but he was a spy. It didn’t take me a long time to figure that one out. Believe me.But I would get the best people, people that I’d be comfortable with. And we will do the right thing.KASICH: Bret, it’s very interesting to note, I think it’s for the good of the record here that they took a survey of foreign policy magazines, 700 foreign policy experts, who would be the best person to conduct foreign policy of all the candidates in the race?I received 55 percent of the vote. Jeb Bush received 30 percent of the vote. And everybody else, none of them made double digits. And that’s because you have to have the experience.And you know, we hear about Ronald Reagan rebuilding the military. I was there when Ronald Reagan rebuilt the military. I worked with him. I was there when Ronald Reagan rebuilt the economy. I was there, and I worked with him. I knew Ronald Reagan.And I’ll leave it right there with what comes after that. You can figure that one out.BAIER: Governor Kasich, thank you.KELLY: We’re going to have more questions for the candidates right after this break. And during the commercial break, join us for a — Facebook live on the FOX News Facebook page and tell us what you think about tonight’s debate in the comment section. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)BAIER: Welcome back to the historic Fox Theater in downtown Detroit and the Republican presidential debate. Let’s get right back to the questions.KELLY: Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is they believe you tell it like it is. But time and time again in this campaign, you have actually told the voters one thing only to reverse yourself within weeks or even sometimes days. We’ve teed up just three examples in a videotape, similar to those we used with Senator Rubio and Senator Cruz in the last debate. The first is on whether the war in Afghanistan was a mistake. Watch.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)CUOMO: What about in Afghanistan? Do you believe that American boots should stay on the ground in Afghanistan to stabilize the situation?TRUMP: We’ve made a terrible mistake getting involved there in the first place. That thing will collapse about two seconds after they leave. Just as I said that Iraq was going to collapse after we leave.(UNKNOWN): About Afghanistan, you said we made a terrible mistake getting involved there in the first place.TRUMP: We made a mistake going into Iraq. I’ve never said we made a mistake...(UNKNOWN): Our question was about Afghanistan. That day on October...TRUMP: Well, OK, I never said that.(UNKNOWN): ... was on Afghanistan.TRUMP: OK. Wouldn’t matter. I never said it.(END VIDEO CLIP)KELLY: Next, on whether we should accept...TRUMP: Should I respond to that first?KELLY: Two more, and then you’ll have the floor. Next on whether we should accept the Syrian refugees...Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TRUMP: You’ll be here a long time.KELLY: On whether we should accept the Syrian refugees.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)O’REILLY: Do you object to migrants who are getting out of the Middle East and North Africa? Do you object to them coming to the USA?TRUMP: I hate the concept of it, but on a humanitarian basis, with what’s happening, you have to. It’s living in Hell in Syria; there’s no question about it. They’re living in Hell.HANNITY: Are you saying absolutely people from Syria, the Middle East, should we allow any of them into this country?TRUMP: Look, from a humanitarian standpoint, I’d love to help, but we have our own problems. We have so many problems that we have to solve.(END VIDEO CLIP)KELLY: Most recently, on whether President George W. Bush lied to get us into the Iraq war.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)TRUMP: They lied. They said there were weapons of mass destruction; there were none. And they knew there were none.I don’t know if he lied or not. He could have lied. Maybe he did. Maybe he didn’t. I guess you’d have to ask him.(END VIDEO CLIP)KELLY: And there are many other examples. So how is any of this “telling it like it is”?TRUMP: Well, on Afghanistan, I did mean Iraq. I think you have to stay in Afghanistan for a while, because of the fact that you’re right next to Pakistan, which has nuclear weapons, and we have to protect that. Nuclear weapons change the game.And I was always against going into Iraq. In fact, I — believe me, I was always against it. There was some cases where I sort of — in one interview with a great friend of mine, and yours, Howard Stern — said that — said that...(LAUGHTER)I said very meekly, long before we went in, I said very meekly, well, maybe, maybe, I don’t know. By the time it got to that point, I was always against Iraq. But Afghanistan, I felt — and in that one, if you notice, I corrected it the second day. OK? Second question? KELLY: There are several examples, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: No, no. But...KELLY: We went through the Afghanistan being a mistake. Within one day, you reversed yourself on Syrian refugees.TRUMP: Now on — let me explain that. You’re right. Let me explain. First time the question had been put to me, it was very early on. The migration had just started. And I had heard that the number was a very, very small number.By the second day, two or three days later, I heard the number was going to be thousands and thousands of people. You know, when they originally heard about it, they were talking about bringing very, very small numbers in.And I said, begrudgingly, well, I guess maybe that’s OK. It was not like, “Let’s bring them in,” because I think we should build a safe zone in — we should really — what we should be doing is building safe zones so they can stay in their own country and not go all over, and at least this way we’re not going to have the problem. That’s what we have to do.(APPLAUSE)But just — just to set — because I fully understand what you’re asking. When I first heard the question, first time the question was ever asked to me, first time I really had known about the question, the migration had just started. I was very much like, OK, by the time I went back and studied it, and they were talking about bringing thousands and thousands, I changed my tune. And I don’t think there’s anything wrong with that.KELLY: But the point I’m going for is you change your tune on so many things, and that has some people saying, what is his core?TRUMP: Megyn, I have a very strong core.(APPLAUSE)I have a very strong core. But I’ve never seen a successful person who wasn’t flexible, who didn’t have a certain degree of flexibility. You have to have a certain degree of flexibility.(APPLAUSE)You can’t — for instance, let’s say, on — on the second question, you can’t say it’s OK, and then you find out it’s not OK, and you don’t want to do anything. You have to be flexible, because you learn. I mean, before I knew the question was asked by Bill, and the next day, or the couple of days later, the question was asked by, by — you know — I was asked by a number of people, actually. I was asked by Sean, but I was asked by a number of people. But by that time, the number had increased significantly.KELLY: Sean was the next day after Bill.TRUMP: The next day. But I had learned. I mean, nobody had ever asked me the question. This was brand new. But — and I really mean it. You have to show a degree of flexibility. If you’re going to be one way and you think it’s wrong, does that mean the rest of your life you have to go in the wrong direction because you don’t want to change? (APPLAUSE)KASICH: Megyn.TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE)KELLY: Go ahead, Governor.KASICH: I did 200 meetings in New Hampshire, I don’t know how many in Michigan now. In these townhalls people come in and they’re very emotional meetings. And, you know what they really want to know? If somebody tells them something, can they believe it?And, the reason why people are so upset in this country is because politicians all the time tell them what they want to hear. And, they go to Washington, or they go to the state capital, wherever, and they don’t deliver on those promises.You know, when I ran for Governor of Ohio, I said not only would we balance the budget, but we would cut taxes. People said that can’t be done. I wouldn’t have said it if I didn’t believe it.We cut taxes in Ohio more than any governor in the country, and $5 billion dollars worth of tax cuts — we’re not running a surplus in Ohio. But, you see, what’s getting in the hearts and souls of the people is they want change, and they keep putting outsiders in to bring about the change, then the change doesn’t come. Then they put more outsiders in because we’re putting people in that don’t understand compromise. They don’t understand policy...(BELL RINGING)(APPLAUSE)KASICH: ... They’re getting more and more frustrated with the system which is why we must pick somebody that has a record of achievement, not just talk.KELLY: OK.KASICH: Not just talk, but a record of achievement. That’s how we’ll restore credibility..RUBIO: ... This isn’t just about flexibility.KELLY: Go ahead, Senator. RUBIO: There’s a difference between flexibility and telling people whatever you think you need to say to get them to do what you want them to do.(CHEERING)RUBIO: And, that’s what Donald has done throughout his career.TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE)RUBIO: Well, he did, and that’s why Trump University...TRUMP: ... That’s not right...RUBIO: ... Is so relevant here. I saw this video last week where he’s sitting in front of a camera saying we’re going to hire the best people, and I’m going to hand pick them. There are going to be hand picked and instructors, the best instructors in the world. One of them, but the way, was the manager at a Buffalo Wild Wing. And, that’s who they hired to do this, and people borrowed money, and they signed up for this fake university.And, these people owe all this money now, and they got nothing in return for it, but you are willing to say whatever you had to say...(BELL RINGING)RUBIO: ... To get them to give you their money...KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump...TRUMP: ... We’ll find out when we have the (INAUDIBLE)...RUBIO: ... And, we’re not going to do that to our country...TRUMP: ... And, by the way, just so you understand...(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: ... This is a case I could have settled very easily, but I don’t settle cases very easily when I’m right. Ninety-eight percent approval rating, we have an “A” from the Better Business Bureau...RUBIO: ... That’s false...TRUMP: ... We have a 98 percent approval rating from the people who took the course. We have an “A” from the Better Business Bureau. And, people like it. Now, he’s saying they didn’t learn.We have many, many people that will be witnesses. Again, I don’t settle cases. I don’t do it because that’s why I don’t get sued very often, because I don’t settle, unlike a lot of other people.We have a situation where we will win in court...(BELL RINGING) TRUMP: But, many of the people that are witnesses did tremendously well, and made a lot of money...RUBIO: ... That’s false...TRUMP: ... By taking the course.KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.TRUMP: You’re going to see, you don’t know...RUBIO: ... The Better Business Bureau gave it a “D” minus.TRUMP: You’re going to see, you’re going to see.KELLY: ... It’s Senator Rubio’s turn...TRUMP: ... No, no. Before they had the information...RUBIO: ... Go on my website, Marco Rubio.com...TRUMP: ... Before they had the information...KELLY: ... Senator Rubio, standby, let him finish his point, and then I’ll give you the floor...TRUMP: ... Before they had the information it got — it is right now an “A”, once they had the information...RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE) this anymore.TRUMP: ... The only reason that is was a “D” was because we didn’t care — we didn’t give them the information...RUBIO: ... A third of the people (INAUDIBLE)...TRUMP: ... When they got the information it became an “A”...KELLY: ... With respect — wait. With respect...TRUMP: ... Marco you don’t know (INAUDIBLE)...KELLY: ... With respect, we went back and looked at this...TRUMP: ... Yes.KELLY: The rating from the Better Business Bureau was a “D” minus...(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: ... (INAUDIBLE)KELLY: ... that’s the last publicly available rating in 2010, and it was the result of a number of complaints they had...
                The New York Times will be checking assertions made throughout the 2016 presidential campaign.            TRUMP: ... But it was elevated to an “A”...UNIDENTIFIABLE MALE: (INAUDIBLE)KELLY: ... That’s never been publicly available.TRUMP: ... I can give it to you. I can give it to you tomorrow..KELLY: ... Let’s just bring the viewers up to speed, let’s just bring the viewers up to speed.TRUMP: ... It was elevated to an “A”.KELLY: Let me just set the record, and then you guys can have at it. There was Trump University, which was a business that you started, and it was marketed...TRUMP: ... Small business...KELLY: ... to many people, and now there is a class-action of over 5,000 plaintiffs against you, Mr. Trump...TRUMP: ... Right...KELLY: ... And, it involves veterans, and it involves teachers, and it involves so-called little guys, working class, and lower- working class and middle class who say that they were fleeced, who say that it was as scam. The class has been certified, and in that case you counter-sued the lead plaintiff alleging that you were being defamed.That case was thrown out against her...TRUMP: ... The lead plaintiff is now getting out of the case because it’s so bad for her...KELLY: ... But, what happened was...TRUMP: ... Excuse me, the lead plaintiff signed a letter saying how great it was, and it on tape saying how great it was.KELLY: OK, no, but — standby. But, what happened in that case was you counter-sued her. The court threw out your counter-suit, and made you pay almost $800,000 dollars in legal fees of hers, and you made the same argument about 98 percent of the people being happy with Trump University. And, that woman in particular signing a survey saying she liked it while someone was standing over her shoulder...TRUMP: ... She’s trying to get out of the case. She’s trying to get out of the case...KELLY: ... And this is what — standby, this is what the Court of Appeals found. They said that the plaintiffs against you are like the Madoff victims...TRUMP: Oh, give me a break... KELLy: ... This is what the Court of Appeals said.TRUMP: Give me a break.KELLY: This is what the court of appeals said.TRUMP: Give me a break.KELLY: They found that victims of con artists often sing the praises of their victimizers until they realize they have been fleeced.TRUMP: You know what, let’s see what happens in court. This is a civil case. Very easy to have settled. Could settle it now. Very easy to have settled. Let’s see what happens at the end of a couple years when this case is over, OK?KELLY: It has been going for five years.TRUMP: Yes, it has been going for a long time.KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.RUBIO: I spoke to one of the victims yesterday.TRUMP: We’ll win the case.RUBIO: I spoke to one of the victims yesterday.TRUMP: One, one of the victims.RUBIO: No, there are several. Obviously there are so many, I can’t talk to them every day. I spoke to one of them, he told me exactly what happened. They signed up for this course because they believed Mr. Trump was this fantastic businessman, that Donald is going to teach them the tricks of the trade.They signed up. They paid $15,000 for this course. They were asked for additional money for this course. If they really wanted the real secrets of success, they had to pay even more money, and so they did.And you know what they got in these courses? Stuff you can pull off of Zillow. When they finally realized what a scam it was, they asked for their money back.And you refused to give them their money back. Why don’t you tonight...TRUMP: I gave many people their money back. RUBIO: Then why don’t you tonight say you’re going to give the money back to everybody who wants...TRUMP: Let me just...(CROSSTALK)KELLY: OK. Senator Rubio, let him answer.(CROSSTALK)KELLY: Let him answer.Go ahead, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: We will see who’s right at the end of a few years. But all of the — almost all of the people, many, many people signed what’s called the report card at the end, did you like the course, how did you like it.Almost all of them said it was terrific, OK? With letters, with this. Some of them are on tape saying it was terrific. Let’s see what happens at the end of three years.KELLY: With respect, Mr. Trump, one-third of the plaintiffs in that case demanded refunds. So it’s not the case that 98 percent were...TRUMP: I gave some refunds to people because if they asked for the refunds in a certain period of time, and we gave refunds to people.KELLY: OK.TRUMP: But let’s see what happens at the end of three years. Let’s see who’s right.KELLY: Still a pending litigation.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: It’s called pending litigation.RUBIO: Megyn, this is why this is relevant to this election.KELLY: All right. Senator Rubio then Senator Cruz. Go ahead.RUBIO: This is why, because he’s trying to do to the American voter what he did to the people that signed up for this course. He’s making promises he has no intention of keeping. And it won’t just be $36,000 that they lose, it’s our country that’s at stake here.The future of the United States and the most important election in a generation, and he’s trying to con people into giving them their vote just like he conned these people into giving him their money. TRUMP: Let me tell you the real con artist. Excuse me. Excuse me. The real con artist is Senator Marco Rubio who was elected in Florida and who has the worst voting record in the United States Senate.He doesn’t go to vote. He’s absent. He doesn’t go. Now, the people of Florida can’t stand him. He couldn’t get elected dogcatcher. The people of Florida — the people of Florida — and by the way, I know he’s going to spend $25 million on ads. Without that he wouldn’t have a chance. He’s 20 points south.The people in Florida wouldn’t elect him dogcatcher. He couldn’t get any — he’s right now 21 points down to me. And, you know...KELLY: OK.TRUMP: ... again, there will be a lot of advertising. It’s the only thing that might save him. But I doubt it.RUBIO: Notice that’s not an answer.KELLY: I’m coming to you next. But go ahead.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: He scammed the people of Florida. He scammed people. He doesn’t vote. He doesn’t show up for the U.S. Senate. He doesn’t vote. He scammed the people. He defrauded the people of Florida.KELLY: With respect, you’ve made that point.Go ahead.RUBIO: There’s no — as you can see in his answer, it’s always the same thing.TRUMP: You defrauded the people of Florida, little Marco.RUBIO: He has defrauding people out of things, and not just — and not just, by the way, on the issue of Trump University. He had another development in Mexico that he had nothing to do with except his name on the building. People put money into that building.TRUMP: That was licensing.RUBIO: They lost their money. Yes, licensing, but you told them you owned the building. So they gave him his money. They lost their money. Time and again...KELLY: All right. Stand by. I will come back to you. Senator Cruz wants to weigh in. You’re coming back.Go ahead.CRUZ: Megyn, let me ask the voters at home, is this the debate you want playing out in the general election? The stakes in this election are too high. For seven years, millions of Americans, we’ve been struggling, wages have been stagnating, people are hurting, our constitutional rights are under assault.And if we nominate Donald, we’re going to spend the spring, the fall, and the summer with the Republican nominee facing a fraud trial...TRUMP: Oh, stop it.CRUZ: ... with Hillary Clinton saying...TRUMP: It’s just a minor case. It’s a minor case.CRUZ: ... why did you give my campaign and my foundation $100,000?TRUMP: It’s a minor civil case.CRUZ: And with Hillary Clinton...TRUMP: Give me a break.CRUZ: ... pointing out that he supported her four times in her presidential race.TRUMP: It’s a minor civil case.CRUZ: Donald, learn not to interrupt. It’s not complicated.TRUMP: There are many, many civil cases.CRUZ: Count to 10, Donald. Count to 10.TRUMP: Give me a break.CRUZ: Count to 10. The stakes are too high and if you are one of the 65 to 70 percent of Republicans who recognize that nominating Donald would be a disaster, then I ask you to come join us. If you’re supporting other candidates, come join us.We welcome you to our team because we’ve demonstrated not once, not twice, not three times, but five separate times we have beat Donald. And if you don’t want him to be the nominee, then I ask you to stand with us as a broad coalition of people who believe in the Constitution, believe in freedom, and want to turn this country around.KELLY: Go ahead, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: I don’t believe these politicians. All talk, no action. I’m standing here listening to — I’m hearing him say about a percentage. CNN, he gets 15. That means 85 percent, based on what you’re saying, of the people don’t dig you, number one, number one. Is that a correct statement? How do you get — are you at 15 in the new CNN poll? Do you believe in CNN? I mean, I know we’re with FOX. But CNN spent — CNN...CRUZ: All right, I’ll respond...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: CNN spent a lot of money on a poll, just came out. I’m at 49. He’s at 15. He tells me about 65 percent of the people. It’s not 65 percent of the people. If you go by that, 85 percent of the people.Then he goes, we have five. And — well, excuse me, I won 10. I won 10 states. If you listen to him, it’s like — I won 10 states. Everybody knows that on Super Tuesday Trump was the winner. There wasn’t one person that didn’t say that. Even the two people on your left and right said we did a great job. So how does he take — how does he take five and say it’s better than 10?KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.TRUMP: I am by far the leader. But if you listen to a politician, he’ll try and convince you otherwise.KELLY: Senator Cruz, go.CRUZ: All right, well, Donald lives by the polls every day. He tweets about the polls.TRUMP: No, I don’t. No, I don’t.CRUZ: He’s told us to look to the CNN poll. Well, that’s a very good poll to look to, because that CNN poll showed that head to head Donald Trump loses to Hillary Clinton by 8 points. He doesn’t just lose close; he loses by 8 points. That same poll he told you to look at shows me beating Hillary Clinton.(APPLAUSE)We cannot mess this up. And, by the way, the last four polls in a row, when you nominate a candidate who literally has been on every side of every issue, and in the course of this debate may be on two other sides before we’re done, that’s not how you win. And the stakes are too high. (CROSSTALK)KELLY: All right. I’m going to let Mr. Trump — I’m going to let — let me just...TRUMP: According to your poll...(CROSSTALK)KELLY: I’m going to let you respond to that, Mr. Trump. I’m going to then go to you, Governor. You’re up next.TRUMP: ... I know, but your recent polls have me beating Hillary Clinton, and very, very easily.KELLY: OK. Do you want to weigh in?KASICH: All right, look, honestly, when I see people at these meetings, these town halls, where we take massive questions, and I get to spend time with them. Last night, there was a woman that came to tell me about the loss of her 15-year-old son, who took his own life.See, there’s people in this country — and Ted’s right — their wages haven’t gone up for so long, they see the rich get richer, they believe, and they’re not moving. And they put their money in the bank, and they got no interest on their money. They receive none. And their sons or daughters are living in the basement because they can’t get a good job after they rang up so much college debt.What people are hungry for is, who can fix this? People want to know who — what can you do to solve the problems in Washington, to make sure that we have stronger job growth and better wages? But you know what else they’re yearning for? They want to believe that they have the power to fix things where they live, and they want the power back, so they can begin to do things in their community.Now, listen, this has been going on for a long time here. And I appreciate the discussion back and forth. But there are a lot of people out there yearning for somebody who’s going to bring America back, both at the leadership level and in the neighborhood, where we can begin to reignite the spirit of the United States of America. And let’s stop fighting.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Governor, thank you. Gentlemen, thank you.WALLACE: Much more to come live from the Fox Theater, including where the candidates stand on the social issues facing the country. The Republican presidential debate continues in a moment.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)KELLY: Welcome back, everybody, to the Fox News Republican presidential debate. We want to get right back to the questions.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: We are here in Detroit. The top issues in Michigan, according to Facebook, are displayed in a word cloud you’re taking a look at. The second biggest issue is clean water. That, of course, is directly tied with the situation in Flint.Senator Rubio, Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton have both been to Flint. They are both running ads in this state focusing on that, focusing on supporting Flint and fixing the problems, showing images of people in Flint thankful that they’re there.Without getting into the political blame game here, where are the national Republicans’ plans on infrastructure and solving problems like this? If you talk to people in this state, they are really concerned about Flint on both sides of the aisle. So why haven’t GOP candidates done more or talked more about this?RUBIO: Well, I know I’ve talked about it, and others in our campaign have talked about it, and other candidates have talked about it, as well. What happened in Flint was a terrible thing. It was systemic breakdown at every level of government, at both the federal and partially the — both the state and partially at the federal level, as well.And by the way, the politicizing of it I think is unfair, because I don’t think that someone woke up one morning and said, “Let’s figure out how to poison the water system to hurt someone.”(APPLAUSE)But accountability is important. I will say, I give the governor credit. He took responsibility for what happened. And he’s talked about people being held accountable...(APPLAUSE)... and the need for change, with Governor Snyder. But here’s the point. This should not be a partisan issue. The way the Democrats have tried to turn this into a partisan issue, that somehow Republicans woke up in the morning and decided, “Oh, it’s a good idea to poison some kids with lead.” It’s absurd. It’s outrageous. It isn’t true.(APPLAUSE)All of us are outraged by what happened. And we should work together to solve it. And there is a proper role for the government to play at the federal level, in helping local communities to respond to a catastrophe of this kind, not just to deal with the people that have been impacted by it, but to ensure that something like this never happens again.BAIER: Thank you, Senator.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Governor Kasich, the city of Detroit has long suffered with urban blight, broken street lights, dilapidated and vacant houses, and so on. In 2013, Detroit actually declared bankruptcy, which helped, but the schools here remain a big problem. They’re $3.5 billion in debt and are some of the most troubled and poorly testing in the country. The kids too often go to classrooms that are unsafe, falling apart, infested with rodents and insects. Experts say the schools could go bankrupt by next month.Question to you. If the federal government bailed out the auto industry here in Detroit, should it also bail out the Detroit schools?KASICH: Well, look, first of all, I think the mayor now is controlling the schools. This is not much different than what happened in Cleveland, Ohio, where the African-American Democrat mayor, the union, and business leaders came to see me and said, “Would you help us to pass legislation to really create a CEO environment so that we can take control of the schools?”We even invested in a buyout plan, where we bought out the teachers who had been there a long time, because there were so many young teachers who had been laid off who were so enthusiastic to get back in the schools. It worked beautifully. Cleveland’s coming back. The Cleveland schools are coming back because of a major overhaul.It’s the same thing that has to happen in all of our urban schools. And, frankly, look, if I were president, I’d take 104 federal programs, bundle them into four buckets, and send it to the states, because fixing schools rests at the state and the local level, and particularly at the school board level. (APPLAUSE)KASICH: Now, I also believe — I also believe that you need to introduce vocational education in those schools. You need mentoring in those schools. And you need to have a situation where people can have an alternative forum to get a degree. And you need school choice, both vouchers and charter schools. All of those things can come together to help, Megyn.But here’s the bottom line. And I’ll go quickly. We as adults have to fight in our neighborhoods, in our communities, for our children’s education. Put the politics aside, and everyone in this room can play a role in lifting their schools and lifting the students who are in those schools, because too much politics gets in the middle of it, and where we focus as adults, and put children first, we see tremendous results. And the people of this town are going to rise. And they need to be involved. Thank you.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: For — for half a century, as you all know, Detroit was the symbol of America’s industrial might: 300,000 manufacturing jobs in this city. At last count, there are now fewer than 30,000 manufacturing jobs here, and the unemployment rate in this city is 11 percent, twice the national average.Senator Cruz, I know that you have general plans for tax reform, but what specifically would you do to bring manufacturing jobs back to America and train residents of cities like Detroit to do those jobs?CRUZ: Well, Chris, thank you for that question. Let me start by observing that Detroit is a great city with a magnificent legacy that has been utterly decimated by 60 years of failed left-wing policy.(APPLAUSE)You know, Henry Ford revolutionized automobile manufacturing and brought automobiles to the middle class. During World War II, Detroit provided — funded the arsenals of democracy to help us win World War II. In — in the 1960s, Detroit was the Silicon Valley of America. It had a population of 2 million people, had the highest per capita income in the country.And then, for 50 years, left-wing Democrats have pursued destructive tax policies, weak crime policies, and have driven the citizens out. (APPLAUSE)This city now has just 700,000 citizens. There are vacant homes, one after the other after the other. Crime has been rampant, and it is an outrage. And let me say to folks in the media: That is a story that the media ought to be telling over and over again, the destruction of left-wing policies and the millions who have hurt because of it.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Well, I was going to say, I’ll give you 30 seconds to try to answer my question. What specifically would you do to bring manufacturing jobs back to Detroit and to train the residents here to do those jobs?CRUZ: The way you bring manufacturing back to America is, number one, you lift the regulations. As president, I will repeal Obamacare, the biggest job-killer in America.I will pull back the federal regulators, the EPA and all the regulators that are killing small businesses and manufacturing.And my tax plan, which is a very, very detailed plan on the website, tedcruz.org, is what’s called border adjustable. We get rid of all the taxes. We get rid of the corporate income tax and the death tax and the Obamacare taxes and the payroll tax. And we replace it with a 16 percent business flat tax that is border adjustable, which means all exports are entirely tax-free and all imports pay the 16 percent business flat tax. That’s a 32 percent differential.What that will do, Chris, is bring millions of manufacturing jobs back to this country, bring the steel industry back to this country, create an environment where when we compete on a fair and level playing field, American ingenuity can beat anyone. But right now, the federal government isn’t giving us a level playing field.WALLACE: Thank you, Senator.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Gentlemen, the next series of questions will be on social issues. Governor Kasich, the last debate, you were asked a question about religious liberty, in a hypothetical situation where a same-sex couple approaches a cupcake maker to do their wedding. Here’s what you said.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)KASICH: If you’re in the business of selling things, if you’re not going to sell to somebody you don’t agree with, today I’m not going to sell to somebody who’s gay, then tomorrow maybe I won’t sell to somebody who’s divorced.(END VIDEO CLIP)BAIER: Governor, some faith leaders got nervous about that answer. Do gay marriage dissenters have rights?KASICH: Well, look, first of all, I try to be a man of faith every day as best as I can, and I try to focus in my faith on the dos and I think the don’ts will take care of themselves once I get the dos right, which is humility, and loving my enemy, and caring for my neighbor.But secondly, look, you’re in the commerce business, you want to sell somebody a cupcake, great. OK? But now if they ask you to participate in something you really don’t like, that’s a whole ‘nother issue, OK? Another issue.Here’s what I’d like to see happen. The Supreme Court ruled, I don’t agree with the ruling. I’m of favor of marriage between — you know, traditional marriage, a man and a woman. What I hope was going to happen after the Supreme Court ruling is things would settle down.If you go to a photographer to take pictures at your wedding, and he says, I’d rather not do it, find another photographer, don’t sue them in court. You know what, the problem is in our country — in our country, we need to learn to respect each other and be a little bit more tolerant for one another.And at the end of the day, don’t go to court. Can’t we have common sense in America? That’s the way it used to be. And there was a book written called “The Death of Common Sense.” We need to bring it back.But at the end of the day, if somebody is being pressured to participate in something that is against their deeply-held religious beliefs, then we’re going to have to think about dealing with the law.But you know what, I’d rather people figure this out without having to put another law on the books and have more arguments in this country. Why don’t we come together as a country, respect one another, love one another and lift this country? I think that’s what people want.So thanks for asking.BAIER: Senator Cruz, the U.S. Supreme Court obviously declared same-sex marriage legal in all 50 states, a decision you have criticized. Given the current status of the law, do you believe a gay couple should be able to adopt?CRUZ: Well, listen, adoption is decided at the state level and I am a believer in the 10th Amendment in the Constitution, I would leave the question of marriage to the states, I would leave the question of adoption to the states.That’s the way it has been for two centuries of our nation’s history until five unelected judges in an illegitimate and wrong decision decided to seize the authority over marriage and wrongfully tear down the marriage laws of all 50 states.Now, interconnected to this is the question of religious liberty. And at the last debate, one of my colleagues on this stage said on the question of religious liberty and Supreme Court nominees that he’d be willing to compromise and negotiate.The New York Times checks assertions made by the Republican presidential candidates during Thursday’s debate in Detroit.I can tell you, for me, there are areas that we should compromise on. Marginal tax rates, we can reach a middle ground on. But when it comes to core principles and convictions, when it comes to the Constitution and Bill of Rights, I can tell the men and women at home I will never compromise away your religious liberty.And for me, Bret, religious liberty has been a lifelong passion. I’ve spent two decades defending religious liberty, including defending the Ten Commandments before the U.S. Supreme Court and winning. Defending the Pledge of Allegiance before the Supreme Court and winning.And defending the Mojave Desert Veterans Memorial, a lone white Latin cross that was erected to honor the men and women who gave their lives in World War I. I represented 3 million veterans for free defending that memorial and we won 5-4 before the Supreme Court.BAIER: Senator, thank you.Senator Cruz definitely avoided saying your name, Mr. Trump, but I think he was referring to you and your religious liberty answer. Would you like to respond?TRUMP: I have nothing to say. I mean, generally speaking, agree with what he said. I would have certainly have rather left it to the states. I was always in favor — I was very surprised when they came up with that decision.I would have certainly — I would have preferred had it been left to the states and I think most people would have preferred that.BAIER: Senator Rubio, the late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, a conservative icon, obviously, pointed out, in the United States versus Heller, that like most rights, the Second Amendment right is not unlimited.Just like the First Amendment doesn’t allow you to go into a theater and yell fire, he said the Second Amendment leaves room to regulate guns. So do you agree with Justice Scalia? And if so, what limits would you draw around the Second Amendment?RUBIO: As few as possible. The Second Amendment, as I’ve said before, is not a suggestion. It is the constitutional right of every American to protect themselves and their families. It is a right that — it is the Second Amendment for a reason.It is right after the defense of the freedom of speech for a reason, for clearly the founders of our nation understood and the framers of the Constitution understood that you cannot have life and you cannot have liberty and cannot pursue happiness if you are not safe.RUBIO: And the Second Amendment — when people talk about gun laws, what they need to realize is, criminals don’t follow gun laws. They’re criminals. By definition, they ignore the law.(APPLAUSE)But the gun rights of Americans, if you are talking to a law- abiding citizen and a gun-owner like myself, if you pass a law, I will follow whatever the law is. A criminal will not do it. They will continue to pursue these guns on the black market, where they then go out and commit crimes and they steal guns from each other.Gun laws are not effective. They simply do not provide for safety. But they do, however, ensure that law-abiding people don’t have access to weapons to protect themselves and guns to protect themselves, but criminals always will be well armed. They don’t care about the law; they don’t follow the law. We will protect the Second Amendment when I’m president of the United States.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Mr. Trump, you were once a supporter of an assault weapons ban. So do you think there should be any restrictions on the Second Amendment?TRUMP: No, I’m a big defender of the Second Amendment. And if you look at what’s happened, whether it’s in California, where you had the 14 people killed, whether it’s in Paris — which, by the way, has the toughest gun laws in the world and 130 people killed. Many, many people in the hospital gravely injured. They will be dying. Many people will be dying in addition.If we had guns, or if they had guns on the other side of the room, with the bullets going in the opposite direction, you would not have had 130 people killed. That I can tell you right now.(APPLAUSE)So I’m a very, very big supporter of the Second Amendment.BAIER: But in 2000, you wrote in your book, “I generally oppose gun control, but I support the ban on assault weapons.”TRUMP: I don’t support it anymore. I do not support the ban on assault.(AUDIENCE BOOS)BAIER: Senator Cruz? Any limits to the Second Amendment?CRUZ: Well, listen, unlike Donald, I would not support banning firearms. In that instance, Bill Clinton banned many of the most popular firearms in America. And by the way, the study showed that ban did nothing to reduce violent crime. It just took away the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens.(APPLAUSE)And let me point out, you know, it is easy for political candidates to have rhetoric and say, “I support the Second Amendment.” But you cannot say that and at the same time say what Donald just said, which is that on the question of Supreme Court nominees he wants to compromise and reach a middle ground with Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer. That’s what he said in the last debate.TRUMP: I — I did not say that. I did not say that.CRUZ: And any justice that Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer sign off on...TRUMP: I did not say that.CRUZ: And I would point out, Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer are both Democrats that Mr. Trump has written checks to repeatedly. Any justice that those two sign off on is going to be a left-wing judicial activist who will undermine religious liberty, and we are one vote away from the Heller decision being overturned, which would effectively erase the Second Amendment from the Bill of Rights.If you care about the Second Amendment, then you need to ask who on this stage do you know will appoint principled constitutionalists to the court and not cut a deal with your Second Amendment rights?BAIER: Mr. Trump...TRUMP: So we’re listening to the all-talk, no-action politician, and he was the primary supporter of John Roberts, who gave us Obamacare.CRUZ: That’s flat-out wrong.TRUMP: No, it’s not. You take a look. He was the primary supporter. He pushed John Roberts, and pushed him, and pushed him, and Bush ultimately appointed him. He got appointed. And when it came his time to raise his hand and kill Obamacare, not once, but twice, he let us down, and he did the wrong thing.This is the man that was the primary supporter. And you can read law journal, you can read whatever you want to read — I’ve read plenty of it. There was no stronger supporter of John Roberts than him. And it was a very, very big mistake.BAIER: Quickly, Senator Cruz. CRUZ: You know, Donald has a tenuous relationship with the truth.(LAUGHTER)I wrote one op-ed supporting President Bush’s nomination after he made it. I would not have made that nomination. But let me point out...TRUMP: Not what you say in the op-ed.CRUZ: ... if Donald actually cared about...TRUMP: That is not what you said in the op-ed.CRUZ: But, Donald, please, I know it’s hard not to interrupt. But try.TRUMP: Yeah, I know it is. But it’s not what you said in the op-ed.CRUZ: Breathe, breathe, breathe.TRUMP: Lyin’ Ted.CRUZ: You can do it. You can breathe. I know it’s hard. I know it’s hard. But just...RUBIO: When they’re done with the yoga, can I answer a question?CRUZ: You cannot.(LAUGHTER)RUBIO: Unbelievable.CRUZ: I really hope that we don’t — we don’t see yoga on this stage.RUBIO: Well, he’s very flexible, so you never know.(APPLAUSE)CRUZ: But you cannot, in fact, care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support Jimmy Carter for president. You cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support John Kerry for president, as Donald did. You cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support Harry Reid for Senate majority leader.And you cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and write four checks to Hillary Clinton for her to be president if you care at all about the Second Amendment or religious liberty or anything else.BAIER: Gentlemen, gentlemen, we’re going to move on. Thank you very much. We want to talk about some more policy questions coming up.WALLACE: And coming up, the candidates tackle foreign policy. But first, during the commercial break, join us for a Facebook live on the Fox News Facebook page and tell us what you think about tonight’s debate in the comments section. Stay with us. More to come. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)KELLY: Welcome back, everybody. We’re going it get right back to the questions.WALLACE: And gentlemen, we’re going to focus for a bit now on foreign policy.Senator Rubio, you like to take a shot at Mr. Trump on the campaign trail saying that negotiating a hotel deal in a foreign country is not foreign policy. The other day you even compared him to Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, as lunatics trying to get a hold of nuclear weapons.Please tell Mr. Trump why he’s unprepared to be commander-in- chief.RUBIO: Well, first of all, I think, as we’ve seen throughout this campaign, Donald has not shown a seriousness about the issues of foreign policy. He just simply hasn’t.Whether it was the structure of our military, even today he was asked a question about the issue of commanders not following his lead on killing the family of terrorists. And his answer basically was, if I tell them to do it, they’re going to do it. Now that’s just not true.Foreign policy is not only consequential, I think much of our future now depends on it. You know, I see a lot of young people at my events around the country. I feel great when they come.And I always them that despite the hardships of the moment, I honestly believe that today’s Millennials have a chance to be the greatest generation we’ve had in 100 years. I really do.Because the world today has hundreds of millions of people that can afford to be their clients, their customers, their partners, people they collaborate with. But that won’t happen if the world is dangerous and it’s unstable.And that will require strong American leadership. The next president of the United States is going to have eight years of a mess of a foreign policy to clean up. That’s why it can’t be Hillary Clinton.And quite frankly, that’s why it can’t be someone who simply has not shown the intellectual curiosity or the interest in learning about these very complicated issues. And Donald simply hasn’t.WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your response.TRUMP: Well, let me just say this. I’ve gotten to know Marco over a period of time, believe me, he is not a leader. Believe me.RUBIO: But that doesn’t answer the question. (CROSSTALK)WALLACE: He didn’t interrupt you. Let him talk.TRUMP: He didn’t answer — he’s not a leader. And, frankly, when I say they’ll do as I tell them, they’ll do as I tell them. And that’s very — it’s very simple. It’s very simple.We are in a very dangerous place. We have a depleted military. Totally depleted. We have — by the way, our vets are treated horribly. We’re going to take care of our vets. We’re going to start taking care of our vets, properly, like we should.(APPLAUSE)But we’re going to build up our military, and we’re going to get the equipment we want, not the equipment that’s sold to us by somebody that gave him and him and not the governor campaign contributions. OK? We’re going to get the equipment that the generals and the soldiers want.I will prove to be a great leader. And, you know, it’s very interesting, we talk about the polls. Every single poll when it comes to ISIS and the military and the border say, by far, Trump is the best.WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your time is up.RUBIO: Yeah, I just want to — a couple points. Once again, he was pressed on a policy issue to show his understanding of the foreign policy, and his reaction was just to attack somebody else with a name.Here’s the bottom line. And I’m going to repeat it again. The world today is as complicated and as complex as it has been certainly in a very — certainly in the lifetime of anybody here today. You indeed do have a lunatic in North Korea with nuclear weapons. You indeed do have the Chinese government taking over the most important shipping lane in the world. And Vladimir Putin, who you’ve expressed admiration for, Donald...TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.RUBIO: You’ve expressed admiration for him.TRUMP: Wrong.(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: Donald, you said he’s a strong leader.TRUMP: Wrong.RUBIO: He is now dividing Europe up...TRUMP: He said very good things about me, and I said...(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: All right, I’m going to finish my statement here.TRUMP: Yeah, finish.RUBIO: And he’s also sowing instability in the Middle East. You have Iran who’s going to get $100 billion of sanctions relief. You have radical jihadists spreading all over the world. This is a time for seriousness on these issues. You have yet to answer a single serious question about any of this. Will you give us a detailed answer about foreign policy any time you’re asked on it?TRUMP: Let me just tell you, first of all, I’ve been hearing this man so long talking about Putin. Putin said about me — I didn’t say about Putin — Putin said very nice things about me. And I say very nicely, wouldn’t it be nice if actually we could get along with Russia, we could get along with foreign countries, instead of spending trillions and trillions of dollars?You’re talking about Flint, Michigan. You’re talking about places — we need to rebuild the infrastructure of our country. Wouldn’t it be nice if we got along with the world, and maybe Russia could help us in our quest to get rid of ISIS, et cetera, et cetera?(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: Gentlemen, you both have had a chance to talk. You both have had a chance to talk a couple of times. I’d like to move on to Senator Cruz. Senator, we have some breaking news tonight. North Korea’s dictator, Kim Jong-un, has ordered that country’s nuclear weapons to be made ready at a moment’s notice.CRUZ: Yes. Yes.WALLACE: And this comes just hours after the U.N. Security Council announced that — approved the toughest sanctions in two decades against that country. Assume you’re President Cruz tonight. What do you do?CRUZ: Well, you’re right, the news is very disturbing that Kim Jong-un has put their nuclear weapons on ready state. I’m glad that we’re sending another carrier group to the South China Sea. I’m glad that Congress passed sanctions on North Korea.But this is all the result of the failures of the Clinton administration two decades ago that negotiated a deal with North Korea lifting the sanctions, allowing billions of dollars to flow in, and they used that money to develop nuclear weapons in the first place.What we — now we’re in a much harder position. When you have a lunatic with nuclear weapons, to some extent, it constrains your options. We need to be moving the carrier — carrier group to the South China Seas. We — we need to be putting in place missile defense, such as the THAAD missile defense system in South Korea.We need to be pursuing space-based missile defense. One of the advantages of space-based missile defense is that if you have a missile launch in North Korea or you have a missile launch in Iran, a space-based missile defense can take out one or two or three missiles before it can cross over and do damage.And we also need to be putting pressure on China, because North Korea is effectively a — a client state of China. All of that will happen with a strong commander-in-chief that is devoted to keeping this country safe.WALLACE: Thank you, Senator.Governor Kasich, I want to move back to the debate that we heard earlier about Vladimir Putin. In December, after Vladimir Putin had some nice thing to say about Donald Trump, calling him bright and talented, your campaign ran a video suggesting that Trump might name the Russian president as his running mate. Here’s a clip.KASICH: I’ll have to see this.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)(UNKNOWN): If elected, Trump promised that the dictatorial duo would, quote, “make tyranny great again.”TRUMP: I think I’d get along very well with Vladimir Putin. I just think so.(END VIDEO CLIP)(LAUGHTER)WALLACE: That was your campaign video, sir.KASICH: That was a pretty good one.WALLACE: Well, OK.KASICH: No, I...(CROSSTALK)WALLACE: If I may — sir, if I may ask my question...KASICH: Of course.WALLACE: I think you were kidding...WALLACE: But it was your video and the serious question is, because the suggestion is, do you think that Donald Trump is naive about the threat that Vladimir Putin represents?KASICH: I’m not biting. Let me take you around the world, OK? Let me — look, I’m going to take you very quickly.In Russia, we need to tell them we’re going to arm the Ukrainians with defensive lethal weapons. And we’re going to tell Putin if you attack anybody in Eastern Europe in NATO, you attack Finland and Sweden, which is not in NATO, consider it an attack on us. And he will understand that.Secondly, I would tell the Chinese you don’t own the South China Sea. Stop hacking us. And we’re going to beef up our cyber command. And we’re going to be in a position to be able to take out your systems if you continue to do this.Now let’s move over into the Middle East. The Egyptians, they know they’re on their last legs there because of the attack from ISIS. The Jordanians are — really have been our friends. They know that they are at risk. So do the Saudis. So do the Gulf states.They are our allies, really, or have similar aims, we need to bring them closer to us. Turkey a critical avenue to the Middle East. We have to bring them towards the West, and not towards the East.WALLACE: Governor...KASICH: And we have a joint, good human intelligence. That is called a semi-trip around the world. And if you gave me more time, I’d finish the trip.WALLACE: Governor, thank you.KASICH: Thank you.BAIER: Coming up, a final question and closing statements. And take a look at this. The volume of conversation on Facebook surrounding the remaining candidates over the last month. Whether that conversation is good or bad, Donald Trump clearly dominates the field.We’ll be back with more of the Republican presidential debate live from Detroit. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)BAIER: Welcome back to the Republican presidential debate. Let’s get back at it.Gentlemen, this is the last question of the night. It has been a long time since our first debate, seven months ago in Cleveland. A lot has transpired since then, obviously, including an RNC pledge that all of you signed agreeing to support the party’s nominee and not to launch an independent run. Tonight, in 30 seconds, can you definitively say you will support the Republican nominee, even if that nominee is Donald J. Trump?Senator Rubio, yes or no?RUBIO: I’ll support the Republican nominee.BAIER: Mr. Trump? Yes or no?RUBIO: I’ll support Donald if he’s the Republican nominee, and let me tell you why. Because the Democrats have two people left in the race. One of them is a socialist. America doesn’t want to be a socialist country. If you want to be a socialist country, then move to a socialist country.The other one is under FBI investigation. And not only is she under FBI investigation, she lied to the families of the victims of Benghazi, and anyone who lies to the families of victims who lost their lives in the service of our country can never be the commander- in-chief of the United States.BAIER: Senator...RUBIO: We must defeat Hillary Clinton.BAIER: Senator Cruz, yes or no, you will support Donald Trump is he’s the nominee?CRUZ: Yes, because I gave my word that I would. And what I have endeavored to do every day in the Senate is do what I said I would do. You know, just on Tuesday, we saw an overwhelming victory in the state of Texas where I won Texas by 17 percent.And I will say it was a powerful affirmation that the people who know me best, the people who I campaigned, who made promises that if you elect me, I’ll lead the fight against Obamacare, I’ll lead the fight against amnesty, I’ll lead the fight against our debt, and I will fight for the Bill of Rights and your rights every day, that the people of Texas said you have kept your word, and that’s what I’ll do as president.BAIER: Governor Kasich, yes or no, would you support Donald Trump as the Republican nominee?KASICH: Yeah. But — and I kind of think that, before it’s all said and done, I’ll be the nominee. But let me also say...(APPLAUSE)But let me also say, remember...BAIER: But your answer is yes?KASICH: But I’m the little engine that can. And, yeah, look, when you’re in the arena, and we’re in the arena. And the people out here watching — we’re in the arena, we’re traveling, we’re working, we spend time away from our family, when you’re in the arena, you enter a special circle. And you want to respect the people that you’re in the arena with. So if he ends up as the nominee — sometimes, he makes it a little bit hard — but, you know, I will support whoever is the Republican nominee for president.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I’m going to ask you a version of the same question. As we saw today with Mitt Romney, the #NeverTrump movement is gaining steam. Some people are talking about contributing millions of dollars to try to stop you. Again today, you raised the possibility that you might run as an independent if you feel you’re treated unfairly by the Republican Party.So I’m going to phrase the question that the other three people on this stage just got. Can you definitively say tonight that you will definitely support the Republican nominee for president, even if it’s not you?TRUMP: Even if it’s not me?(LAUGHTER)Let me just start off by saying...WALLACE: Thirty seconds, sir.TRUMP: ... OK — that I’m very, very proud of — millions and millions of people have come to the Republican Party over the last little while. They’ve come to the Republican Party. And by the way, the Democrats are losing people. This is a trend that’s taking place. It’s the biggest thing happening in politics, and I’m very proud to be a part of it. And I’m going to give them some credit, too, even though they don’t deserve it. But the answer is: Yes, I will.WALLACE: Yes, you will support the nominee of the party? TRUMP: Yes, I will. Yes. I will.KELLY: Candidates, it’s now time for your closing statements. Governor Kasich, we’ll start with you.KASICH: Well, ladies and gentlemen, I love being here in Michigan, and I want to say to all of you here that I have a record of being able to solve some of the biggest problems. It’s not just talk, and it’s not theory.I did it in Washington by helping people get into a healthier economic situation. I’ve done it in Ohio. And as we’ve made progress in Ohio, we’ve left no one behind. We’ve not left behind the mentally ill, the drug addicted, the working poor, the developmental disabled, and we have raised our minority community.And as president of the United States, I will go back to Washington, I will take the formulas that I used, and I will — I will fix the problems in Washington, and you’ll work with me as I send you power to fix your — your communities, your neighborhoods, your state, and together, we’ll restore the spirit of America. And I know you want that. Thank you.(APPLAUSE)WALLACE: Senator Rubio, 30 seconds, closing statement.RUBIO: Well, I know this has been an unusual election cycle, as it continues, and there’s a lot of problems in America, and people are truly hurting. But this election is not just about confronting our problems; it’s also about embracing our opportunities.I believe the 21st century holds the potential to be the greatest era in the history of the United States, if we get this election right and if we act now. If we do, if we do what needs to be done, we can leave our children as the freest and most prosperous Americans that have ever lived, and the 21st century can be the greatest era in the amazing story of America. So I ask everyone to vote for me and join our effort at marcorubio.com.(APPLAUSE)BAIER: Senator Cruz, your closing statement?CRUZ: I want to talk to every soldier and sailor and airman and Marine. I want to talk to every mom and dad and sister and brother and son and daughter of someone fighting for this country. For seven years, you’ve had a commander-in-chief that doesn’t believe in you, that sends you into combat with rules of engagement that tie your arms behind your back. That is wrong. It is immoral. And in January 2017, it will end.I want to also talk to all the police officers and firefighters and first responders who have been left behind with this president. Starting in January 2017, I will have your back.(APPLAUSE)KELLY: Mr. Trump, your closing statement.TRUMP: Thank you. I am going to bring jobs back to the United States like nobody else can. We’re going to fix our very depleted military. We’re going to take care of our vets. We’re going to strengthen our borders. And you’re going to be very, very proud of this country in just a few years if I’m elected president. Thank you.KELLY: Thank you, sir.And that will do it for the 11th Republican primary debate of the 2016 presidential race. But the night is not over yet.WALLACE: Not by a long shot. A special edition of “The O’Reilly Factor” is next. And remember, Fox News has the race for the White House covered, all the way to the conventions and onto the general election.BAIER: Our thanks to Detroit and the crowd here. Thank you again for joining us. Have a great evening.Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementOCT. 28, 2015
The Times reporter Michael D. Shear analyzes key moments from the third Republican presidential debate in Boulder, Colo., on Wednesday. It included sharp early exchanges, including one between Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio.Following is a transcript of the main Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.QUINTANILLA: Good evening, I’m Carl Quintanilla, with my colleagues Becky Quick and John Harwood. We’ll be joined tonight by some of CNBC’s top experts on the markets and personal finance.QUINTANILLA: Let’s get through the rules of the road. Candidates get 30 seconds to answer the opening question, 60 seconds to answer a formal question, 30 seconds for follow-ups and rebuttals, all at the discretion of the moderators.We want you to weigh in from home. You’ll see your tweets at the bottom of the screen. Use the hashtag, #cNBCgopdebate. You can also go to cNBC.com/vote to tell us where you stand throughout the night.So let’s introduce the candidates for tonight’s Republican presidential debate. On the stage from left to right, Governor John Kasich.Advertisement(APPLAUSE)Governor Mike Huckabee.(APPLAUSE)Governor Jeb Bush.(APPLAUSE)Senator Marco Rubio.(APPLAUSE)AdvertisementMr. Donald Trump.(APPLAUSE)Dr. Ben Carson.(APPLAUSE)Mrs. Carly Fiorina.(APPLAUSE)Senator Ted Cruz.(APPLAUSE)Governor Chris Christie.(APPLAUSE) And Senator Rand Paul.(APPLAUSE)A lot to get to tonight. So let’s get started. This first is an open question.This series of debates is essentially a job interview with the American people. And in any job interview, you know this: you get asked, “what’s your biggest weakness?” So in 30 seconds, without telling us that you try too hard or that you’re a perfectionist...(LAUGHTER)...what is your biggest weakness and what are you doing to address it? We’ll go left to right. Governor Kasich, 30 seconds.KASICH: Good question, but I want to tell you, my great concern is that we are on the verge, perhaps, of picking someone who cannot do this job.I’ve watched to see people say that we should dismantle Medicare and Medicaid and leave the senior citizens out — out in the — in the cold. I’ve heard them talk about deporting 10 or 11 — people here from this country out of this country, splitting families. I’ve heard about tax schemes that don’t add up, that put our kids in — in a deeper hole than they are today.We need somebody who can lead. We need somebody who can balance budgets, cut taxes...QUINTANILLA: Governor?AdvertisementKASICH: You know, frankly, I did it in Washington, in Ohio, and I will do it again in Washington, if I’m president, to get this country moving again.KASICH: country moving again.QUINTANILLA: Governor Huckabee.HUCKABEE: Well, John, I don’t really have any weaknesses that I can think of.(LAUGHTER)But my wife is down here in the front, and I’m sure, if you’d like to talk to her later, she can give you more than you’ll ever be able to take care of.If I have a weakness, it’s that I try to live by the rules. I try to live by the rules, no matter what they are, and I was brought up that way as a kid. Play by the rules.And I’ll tell you what a weakness is of this country: there are a lot of people who are sick and tired because Washington does not play by the same rules that the American people have to play by.QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor. Governor Bush.BUSH: You know, I am by my nature impatient. And this is not an endeavor that rewards that. You gotta be patient. You gotta be — stick with it, and all that.But also, I can’t fake anger. I believe this is still the most extraordinary country on the face of the Earth. And it troubles me that people are rewarded for tearing down our country. It’s never been that way in American politics before.BUSH: I can’t do it. I just don’t believe that this country’s days are going to be deeply — you know, going down. I think we’re on the verge of the greatest time, and I want to fix the things to let people rise up.AdvertisementQUINTANILLA: Senator Rubio.RUBIO: Thank you for that question. I would begin by saying that I’m not sure it’s a weakness, but I do believe that I share a sense of optimism for America’s future that, today, is eroding from too many of our people.I think there’s a sense in this country today that somehow our best days are behind us. And that doesn’t have to be true.Our greatest days lie ahead if we are willing to do what it takes now. If we’re willing to do what it takes now, the 21st century is going to be the new American century, greater than any other era we’ve had in the history of this great nation.QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump?TRUMP: I think maybe my greatest weakness is that I trust people too much. I’m too trusting. And when they let me down, if they let me down, I never forgive. I find it very, very hard to forgive people that deceived me. So I don’t know if you would call that a weakness, but my wife said “let up.”(LAUGHTER)QUINTANILLA: Dr. Carson?CARSON: Probably in terms of the applying for the job of president, a weakness would be not really seeing myself in that position until hundreds of thousands of people began to tell me that I needed to do it. I do, however, believe in Reagan’s 11th commandment, and will not be engaging in awful things about my compatriots here.And recognizing that it’s so important, this election, because we’re talking about America for the people versus America for the government.QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina?FIORINA: Well, gee, after the last debate, I was told that I didn’t smile enough. (LAUGHTER)QUINTANILLA: Fixed it.FIORINA: But I also think that these are very serious times; 75 percent of the American people think the federal government is corrupt. I agree with them. And this big powerful, corrupt bureaucracy works now only for the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected. Meantime, wages have stagnated for 40 years. We have more Americans out of work or just Americans who quit looking for work for 40 years.AdvertisementOurs was intended to be a citizen government. This is about more than replacing a D with an R. We need a leader who will help us take our government back.QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz?CRUZ: I’m too agreeable, easy going.(LAUGHTER)You know, I think my biggest weakness is exactly the opposite. I’m a fighter. I am passionate about what I believe. I’ve been passionate my whole life about the Constitution. And, you know, for six-and-a-half years, we’ve had a gigantic party. If you want someone to grab a beer with, I may not be that guy. But if you want someone to drive you home, I will get the job done and I will get you home.QUINTANILLA: Governor Christie?CHRISTIE: I don’t see a lot of weakness on this stage, quite frankly. Where I see the weakness is in those three people that are left on the Democratic stage. You know, I see a socialist, an isolationist and a pessimist. And for the sake of me, I can’t figure out which one is which.(LAUGHTER)But I will — but I will tell you this, the socialist says they’re going to pay for everything and give you everything for free, except they don’t say they’re going to raise it through taxes to 90 percent to do it. The isolationist is the one who wants to continue to follow a foreign policy that has fewer democracies today than when Barack Obama came into office around the world.But I know who the pessimist is. It’s Hillary Clinton. And you put me on that stage against her next September, she won’t get within 10 miles of the White House. Take it to the bank.QUINTANILLA: Senator Paul?PAUL: You know, I left my medical practice and ran for office because I was concerned about an $18 trillion debt. We borrow a million dollars a minute. Now, on the floor of the Congress, the Washington establishment from both parties puts forward a bill that will explode the deficit. It allows President Obama to borrow unlimited amounts of money.I will stand firm. I will spend every ounce of energy to stop it. I will begin tomorrow to filibuster it. And I ask everyone in America to call Congress tomorrow and say enough is enough; no more debt.QUINTANILLA: Thanks to all the candidates.John?HARWOOD: Mr. Trump, you’ve done very well in this campaign so far by promising to build a wall and make another country pay for it.AdvertisementTRUMP: Right.HARWOOD: Send 11 million people out of the country. Cut taxes $10 trillion without increasing the deficit.TRUMP: Right.HARWOOD: And make Americans better off because your greatness would replace the stupidity and incompetence of others.TRUMP: That’s right.HARWOOD: Let’s be honest.(LAUGHTER)Is this a comic book version of a presidential campaign?TRUMP: No, not a comic book, and it’s not a very nicely asked question the way you say that.Larry Kudlow is an example, who I have a lot of respect for, who loves my tax plan. We’re reducing taxes to 15 percent. We’re bringing corporate taxes down, bringing money back in, corporate inversions. We have $2.5 trillion outside of the United States which we want to bring back in.As far as the wall is concerned, we’re going to build a wall. We’re going to create a border. We’re going to let people in, but they’re going to come in legally. They’re going to come in legally. And it’s something that can be done, and I get questioned about that. They built the great wall of China. That’s 13,000 miles. Here, we actually need 1,000 because we have natural barriers. So we need 1,000.TRUMP: We can do a wall. We’re going to have a big, fat beautiful door right in the middle of the wall. We’re going to have people come in, but they’re coming in legally. And Mexico’s going to pay for the wall because Mexico — I love the Mexican people; I respect the Mexican leaders — but the leaders are much sharper, smarter and more cunning than our leaders.And just to finish, people say, how will you get Mexico to pay? A politician other than the people in the states — I don’t want to — a politician cannot get them to pay. I can. We lose, we have a trade imbalance...Excuse me, John.... of $50 billion...HARWOOD: We’re at the 60 seconds.TRUMP: ... believe me the world is peanuts by comparison.AdvertisementHARWOOD: We’re at 60 seconds, but I gotta ask you, you talked about your tax plan. You say that it would not increase the deficit because you cut taxes $10 trillion in the economy would take off like...(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Hold on, hold on. The economy would take off like a rocket ship.TRUMP: Right. Dynamically.HARWOOD: I talked to economic advisers who have served presidents of both parties. They said that you have as chance of cutting taxes that much without increasing the deficit as you would of flying away from that podium by flapping your arms.TRUMP: Then you have to get rid of Larry Kudlow, who sits on your panel, who’s a great guy, who came out the other day and said, I love Trump’s tax plan.(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: The Tax Foundation says — has looked at all of our plans and — and his creates, even with the dynamic effect, $8 trillion dollar deficit... QUICK: Gentlemen — we’ll — we’ll get back to this — just a minute — just a minute we’re gonna continue this.I wanna talk taxes...QUINTANILLA: Hold it. We’ll cut it back to you in just a minute. Becky’s moving on.QUICK: Dr. Carson, let’s talk about taxes.You have a flat tax plan of 10 percent flat taxes, and — I’ve looked at it — and this is something that is very appealing to a lot of voters, but I’ve had a really tough time trying to make the math work on this.If you were to took a 10 percent tax, with the numbers right now in total personal income, you’re gonna come in with bring in $1.5 trillion. That is less than half of what we bring in right now. And by the way, it’s gonna leave us in a $2 trillion hole.AdvertisementSo what analysis got you to the point where you think this will work?CARSON: Well, first of all, I didn’t say that the rate would be 10 percent. I used the tithing analogy.QUICK: I — I understand that, but if you — if you look at the numbers you probably have to get to 28.CARSON: The rate — the rate — the rate is gonna be much closer to 15 percent.QUICK: 15 percent still leaves you with a $1.1 trillion hole.CARSON: You also have to get rid of all the deductions and all the loopholes. You also have to some strategically cutting in several places.Remember, we have 645 federal agencies and sub-agencies. Anybody who tells me that we need every penny and every one of those is in a fantasy world.So, also, we can stimulate the economy. That’s gonna be the real growth engine. Stimulating the economy — because it’s tethered down right now with so many regulations...QUICK: You’d have to cut — you’d have to cut government about 40 percent to make it work with a $1.1 trillion hole.CARSON: That’s not true.QUICK: That is true, I looked at the numbers.CARSON: When — when we put all the facts down, you’ll be able to see that it’s not true, it works out very well.AdvertisementQUICK: Dr. Carson, thank you.KASICH: Listen, I want to just comment.HARWOOD: Governor Kasich, hold it, I’m coming to you right now. The...KASICH: Well I want to comment on this. This is the fantasy...HARWOOD: Well, I’m asking you about this.KASICH: This is the fantasy that I talked about in the beginning.HARWOOD: I’m about to ask you about this.That is, you had some very strong words to say yesterday about what’s happening in your party and what you’re hearing from the two gentlemen we’ve just heard from. Would you repeat it?KASICH: I’m the only person on this stage that actually was involved in the chief architect of balancing the Federal Budget.You can’t do it with empty promised. You know, these plans would put us trillions and trillions of dollars in debt.I actually have a plan. I’m the only one on this stage that has a plan that would create jobs, cut taxes, balance the budget and can get it done because I’m realistic. You just don’t make promises like this.Why don’t we just give a chicken in every pot, while we’re, you know, coming up — coming up with these fantasy tax schemes. We’ll just clean it up. Where are you gonna clean it up?AdvertisementYou have to deal with entitlements, you have to be in a position to control discretionary spending. You gotta be creative and imaginative.Now, let me just be clear, John. I went into Ohio where we had an $8 billion hole and now we have a $2 billion surplus. We’re up 347,000 jobs.When I was in Washington, I fought to get the budget balanced. I was the architect. It was the first time we did it since man walked on the moon. We cut taxes and we had a $5 trillion projected surplus when I left.That’s was hard work. Fiscal discipline, know what you’re doing. Creativity.This stuff is fantasy. Just like getting rid of Medicare and Medicaid. Come on, that’s just not — you scare senior citizens with that. It’s not responsible.HARWOOD: Well, let’s just get more pointed about it. You said yesterday that you were hearing proposals that were just crazy from your colleagues.Who were you talking about?KASICH: Well, I mean right here. To talk about we’re just gonna have a 10 percent tithe and that’s how we’re gonna fund the government? And we’re going to just fix everything with waste, fraud, and abuse? Or that we’re just going to be great? Or we’re going to ship 10 million Americans — or 10 million people out of this country, leaving their children here in this country and dividing families?Folks, we’ve got to wake up. We cannot elect somebody that doesn’t know how to do the job. You have got to pick somebody who has experience, somebody that has the know-how, the discipline.And I spent my entire lifetime balancing federal budgets, growing jobs, the same in Ohio. And I will go back to Washington with my plan.AdvertisementQUINTANILLA: Governor — Governor. thank you, Governor.KASICH: And I will have done it within 100 days, and it will pass. And we will be strong again. Thank you.QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump, 30 seconds.TRUMP: First of all, John got lucky with a thing called fracking, OK? He hit oil. He got lucky with fracking. Believe me, that is why Ohio is doing well. Number — and that is important for you to know.Number two, this was the man that was a managing general partner at Lehman Brothers when it went down the tubes and almost took every one of us with it, including Ben and myself, because I was there and I watched what happened.And Lehman Brothers started it all. He was on the board. And he was a managing general partner.And just thirdly, he was so nice. He was such a nice guy. And he said, oh, I’m never going to attack. But then his poll numbers tanked. He has got — that is why he is on the end.(LAUGHTER) And he got nasty. And he got nasty. So you know what? You can have him.(CROSSTALK)KASICH: Let me just — let me respond. First of all, Ohio does have an energy industry, but we’re diversified. We’re one of the fastest growing states in the country. We came back from the dead. And you know what? It works very, very well.And secondly, when you talk about me being on the board of Lehman Brothers, I wasn’t on the board of Lehman Brothers. I was a banker and I was proud of it. And I traveled the country and learned how people made jobs.We ought to have politicians who not only have government experience but know how the CEOs and the job creators work. My state is doing great across the board. And guess what, in 2011, I got a deal...QUICK: Governor...KASICH: ... an agreement with the...(CROSSTALK)KASICH: ... that he tried to take credit for four years later. It’s a joke.AdvertisementQUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor.QUICK: Dr. Carson, let me get 30 seconds with Dr. Carson...(CROSSTALK)CARSON: Since I was attacked too.QUICK: Thank you.CARSON: Let me just say, if you’re talking about an $18 trillion economy, you’re talking about a 15 percent tax on your gross domestic product. You’re talking about $2.7 trillion. We have a budget closer to $3.5 trillion.But if you also apply that same 15 percent to several other things, including corporate taxes, and including the capital gains taxes, you make that amount up pretty quickly. So that is not by any stretch a pie in the sky.CRUZ: Becky, if you want a 10 percent flat tax where the numbers add up, I rolled out my tax plan today, you can find it on line at tedcruz.org. It is a simple flat tax where for individuals, a family of four pays nothing on the first $36,000.After that you pay 10 percent as a flat tax going up. The billionaire and the working man, no hedge fund manager pays less than his secretary.On top of that, there is a business flat tax of 16 percent. Now that applies universally to giant corporations that with lobbyists right now are not paying taxes, and as small business.And you wanted to know the numbers, the Tax Foundation, which has scored every one of our plans, shows that this plan will allow the economy to generate 4.9 million jobs, to raise wages over 12 percent, and to generate 14 percent growth.And it costs, with dynamic scoring, less than a trillion dollars. Those are the hard numbers. And every single income decile sees a double-digit increase in after-tax income.AdvertisementQUICK: Senator — Senator, thank you.CRUZ: Growth is the answer. And as Reagan demonstrated, if we cut taxes, we can bring back growth.QUICK: Gentlemen, I’m sorry, we need to...(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: We’re going to try to move on.(CROSSTALK)FIORINA: Let me just say on taxes, how long have we been talking about tax reform in Washington, D.C.? We have been talking about it for decades. We now have a 73,000-page tax code.There have been more than 4,000 changes to the tax plan since 2001 alone. There are loads of great ideas, great conservative ideas from wonderful think tanks about how to reform the tax code.The problem is we never get it done. We have talked about tax reform in every single election for decades. It never happens. And the politicians always say it is so complicated, nobody but a politician can figure it out.The truth is this, the big problem, we need a leader in Washington who understands how to get something done, not to talk about it, not to propose it, to get it done.QUINTANILLA: You want to bring 70,000 pages to three?FIORINA: That’s right, three pages.QUINTANILLA: Is that using really small type?FIORINA: You know why three?QUINTANILLA: Is that using really small type?FIORINA: No. You know why three? Because only if it’s about three pages are you leveling the playing field between the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected who can hire the armies of lawyers and accountants and, yes, lobbyists to help them navigate their way through 73,000 pages.AdvertisementThree pages is about the maximum that a single business owner or a farmer or just a couple can understand without hiring somebody. Almost 60 percent of American people now need to hire an expert to understand their taxes.So yes, you’re going to hear a lot of talk about tax reform —QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina —FIORINA: — the issue is who is going to get it done.(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: We’re going to —QUICK: We’re going to move on.QUINTANILLA: We will come around the bend, i promise. This one is for Senator Rubio. You’ve been a young man in a hurry ever since you won your first election in your 20s. You’ve had a big accomplishment in the Senate, an immigration bill providing a path to citizenship the conservatives in your party hate, and even you don’t support anymore. Now, you’re skipping more votes than any senator to run for president. Why not slow down, get a few more things done first or least finish what you start?RUBIO: That’s an interesting question. That’s exactly what the Republican establishment says too. Why don’t you wait in line? Wait for what? This country is running out of time. We can’t afford to have another four years like the last eight years.Watching this broadcast tonight are millions of people that are living paycheck to paycheck. They’re working as hard as they ever have, everything costs more, and they haven’t had a raise in decades.You have small businesses in America that are struggling. For the first time in 35 years, we have more businesses closing than starting. We have a world that’s out of control and has grown dangerous and a president that is weakening our military and making our foreign policy unstable and unreliable in the eyes of our allies. And our adversaries continue to grow stronger.We have a — they say there’s no bipartisanship in Washington? We have a $19 trillion bipartisan debt and it continues to grow as we borrow money from countries that do not like us to pay for government we cannot afford.The time to act is now. The time to turn the page is now. If we — if we don’t act now, we are going to be the first generation in American history that leaves our children worse off than ourselves.AdvertisementQUINTANILLA: So when the Sun-Sentinel says Rubio should resign, not rip us off, when they say Floridians sent you to Washington to do a job, when they say you act like you hate your job, do you?RUBIO: Let me say, I read that editorial today with a great amusement. It’s actually evidence of the bias that exists in the American media today.QUINTANILLA: Well, do you hate your job?RUBIO: Let me — let me answer your question on the Sun-Sentinel editorial today. Back in 2004, one of my predecessors to the Senate by the name of Bob Graham, a Democrat, ran for president missing over 30 percent of his votes. I don’t recall them calling for his resignation —QUINTANILLA: Is that the standard?RUBIO: Later that year, in 2004, John Kerry ran for president missing close to 60 to 70 percent of his votes. I don’t recall the Sun — in fact, the Sun-Sentinel endorsed him. In 2008, Barack Obama missed 60 or 70 percent of his votes, and the same newspaper endorsed him again. So this is another example of the double standard that exists in this country between the mainstream media and the conservative movement.(APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: Senator, thank you. John.BUSH: Could I — could I bring something up here, because I’m a constituent of the senator and I helped him and I expected that he would do constituent service, which means that he shows up to work. He got endorsed by the Sun-Sentinel because he was the most talented guy in the field. He’s a gifted politician.But Marco, when you signed up for this, this was a six-year term, and you should be showing up to work. I mean, literally, the Senate — what is it, like a French work week? You get, like, three days where you have to show up? You can campaign, or just resign and let someone else take the job. There are a lot of people living paycheck to paycheck in Florida as well, they’re looking for a senator that will fight for them each and every day.RUBIO: I get to respond, right?QUICK: Thirty seconds.RUBIO: Well, it’s interesting. Over the last few weeks, I’ve listened to Jeb as he walked around the country and said that you’re modeling your campaign after John McCain, that you’re going to launch a furious comeback the way he did, by fighting hard in New Hampshire and places like that, carrying your own bag at the airport. You know how many votes John McCain missed when he was carrying out that furious comeback that you’re now modeling after?BUSH: He wasn’t my senator.RUBIO: No Jeb, I don’t remember — well, let me tell you. I don’t remember you ever complaining about John McCain’s vote record. The only reason why you’re doing it now is because we’re running for the same position, and someone has convinced you that attacking me is going to help you.AdvertisementBUSH: Well, I’ve been —RUBIO: Here’s the bottom line.(APPLAUSE)I’m not — my campaign is going to be about the future of America, it’s not going to be about attacking anyone else on this stage. I will continue to have tremendous admiration and respect for Governor Bush. I’m not running against Governor Bush, I’m not running against anyone on this stage. I’m running for president because there is no way we can elect Hillary Clinton to continue the policies of Barack Obama.QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Senator.TRUMP: I think you’re —(APPLAUSE)(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Hold on. I think there’s a — I’ve got question for —(CROSSTALK)KASICH: John Harwood, there’s a bigger issue here.HARWOOD: Hold on, Governor. I’ve got a question for Governor Bush.(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: No, we’re moving to Governor Bush. Governor, the fact that you’re at the fifth lectern tonight shows how far your stock has fallen in this race, despite the big investment your donors have made.HARWOOD: You noted recently, after slashing your payroll, that you had better things to do than sit around and be demonized by other people. I wanted to ask you —BUSH: No, no. What I said was I don’t believe that I would be president of the United States and have the same dysfunction that exists in Washington, D.C. now.HARWOOD: OK.BUSH: Don’t vote for me if you want to keep the gridlock in Washington, D.C.HARWOOD: Got it.BUSH: But if you want someone who has a proven, effective leadership, that was a governor of a state, that transformed the culture there, elect me so I can fight for the American people and change the culture in Washington, D.C.HARWOOD: But it’s a — OK. It’s a — it’s a question about why you’re having difficulty. I want to ask you in this context.Ben Bernanke, who was appointed Fed chairman by your brother, recently wrote a book in which he said he no longer considers himself a Republican because the Republican Party has given in to know- nothingism. Is that why you’re having a difficult time in this race?BUSH: (inaudible), the great majority of Republicans and Americans believe in a hopeful future. They don’t believe in building walls and a pessimistic view of the future.They’re concerned that Washington is so dysfunctional it is holding them back. There are lids on people’s aspirations. Think about it: six and a half million people working part-time. Workforce participation rates lower than they were in 1977.Six million more people living in poverty than the day that Barack Obama got elected president, and the left just wants more of the same. We have to offer a compelling alternative that is based on hope and optimism and grounded in serious policy, which I’ve laid out.And you can go get it at jeb2016.com.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: We’re gonna get down the line. Becky’s got a question.QUICK: We’ll get to everyone.Ms. Fiorina, I — I’d like to ask you a question. You are running for president of the United States because of your record running Hewlett-Packard. But the stock market is usually a fair indicator of the performance of a CEO, and the market was not kind to you.Someone who invested a dollar in your company the day you took office had lost half of the dollar by the day you left. Obviously, you’ve talked in the past about what a difficult time it was for technology companies, but anybody who was following the market knows that your stock was a much worse performer, if you looked at your competitors, if you looked at the overall market.I just wonder, in terms of all of that — you know, we look back, your board fired you. I just wondered why you think we should hire you now.FIORINA: You know, the NASDAQ dropped 80 percent — 80 percent — and it took 15 years for the NASDAQ to recover. I was recruited to H.P. to save a company.It was a company that had grown into a bloated, inept bureaucracy that cost too much and delivered too little to customers and shareholders. It had missed, before I had arrived, expectations for nine quarters in a row.As an outsider, I tackled H.P.’s entrenched problems head-on. I cut the bureaucracy down to size, re-introduced accountability, focused on service, on innovation, on leading in every market, in every product segment.And yes, it was a very difficult time. However, we saved 80,000 jobs and we went on to grow to 160,000 jobs, and scores of technology companies literally went out of business — like Gateway — taking all their jobs with them.The truth is I had to make some tough calls in some tough times. I think, actually, people are looking for that in Washington now. And yes, I was fired over a disagreement in the boardroom. There are politics in the boardroom as well.And yet the man who led my firing, Tom Perkins, an icon of Silicon Valley, has come out publicly and said, “you know what? We were wrong. She was right. She was a great CEO. She’d be a great president of the United States because the leadership she brought to H.P. is exactly the leadership we need in Washington, D.C.QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina, it’s interesting that you bring up Mr. Perkins, because...(APPLAUSE) ...he said a lot of very questionable things. Last year, in an interview, he said that he thinks wealthy people should get more votes than poor people.I think his quote was that, “if you pay zero dollars in taxes, you should get zero votes. If you pay a million dollars, you should get a million votes.” Is this the type of person you want defending you?FIORINA: Well, this is one of the reasons why Tom Perkins and I had disagreements in the boardroom, Becky.(LAUGHTER)Nevertheless, one of the things that I think people don’t always understand is how accountable a CEO actually is.So you know, I had to report results every 90 days in excruciating detail. I had to answer every single question about every single result and every single projection in public until there were no more questions.And if I misrepresented those results or those projections in any way, I was held criminally liable. Imagine — imagine — if a politician were held to that standard of account.I will run on my record all day long.(APPLAUSE)And I believe people need a leader who is prepared to make tough calls in tough times and stand up...QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina.FIORINA: ...and be held accountable.QUICK: Thank you, we’re out of time. Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina.Carl.QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz. Congressional Republicans, Democrats and the White House are about to strike a compromise that would raise the debt limit, prevent a government shutdown and calm financial markets that fear of — another Washington-created crisis is on the way.Does your opposition to it show that you’re not the kind of problem-solver American voters want?CRUZ: You know, let me say something at the outset. The questions that have been asked so far in this debate illustrate why the American people don’t trust the media.(APPLAUSE) This is not a cage match. And, you look at the questions — “Donald Trump, are you a comic-book villain?” “Ben Carson, can you do math?” “John Kasich, will you insult two people over here?” “Marco Rubio, why don’t you resign?” “Jeb Bush, why have your numbers fallen?”How about talking about the substantive issues the people care about?(APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: (inaudible) do we get credit (inaudible)?CRUZ: And Carl — Carl, I’m not finished yet.CRUZ: The contrast with the Democratic debate, where every fawning question from the media was, “Which of you is more handsome and why?”(LAUGHTER)And let me be clear.(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: So, this is a question about (inaudible), which you have 30 seconds left to answer, should you choose to do so.CRUZ: Let me be clear. The men and women on this stage have more ideas, more experience, more common sense than every participant in the Democratic debate. That debate reflected a debate between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks.(LAUGHTER)And nobody watching at home believed that any of the moderators had any intention of voting in a Republican primary. The questions that are being asked shouldn’t be trying to get people to tear into each other. It should be what are your substantive positions...(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: OK. (inaudible) I asked you about the debt limit and I got no answer.(CROSSTALK)CRUZ: You want me to answer that question? I’m happy to answer the question...(CROSSTALK)CRUZ: Let me tell you how that question...(CROSSTALK)CRUZ: Let me tell you how that question...(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Senator Paul, I’ve got a question for you on the same subject.CRUZ: ... so you don’t actually want to hear the answer, John?HARWOOD: Senator Paul?CRUZ: You don’t want to hear the answer. You just want to...(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: You used your time on something else.Senator Paul?CRUZ: You’re not interested in an answer.(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Senator Paul, the budget deal crafted by Speaker Boehner and passed by the House today makes cuts in entitlement programs, Medicare and Social Security disability, which are the very programs conservatives say need cutting to shrink government and solve our country’s long-term budget deficit. Do you oppose that budget deal because it doesn’t cut those programs enough?PAUL: No, I oppose it because you’re taking money from the entitlement and then spending it immediately on other items. That’s what they’re doing. They’re taking money from Social Security and they’re going to spend it on the military and they’re going to spend it on domestic spending.Here’s the thing. When you look at raising the debt limit, it should be leverage to try to reform government. In 2011, the sequester was passed as a reform to slow down the rate of government. Instead, the Washington establishment raised both. We raised the military spending, took from entitlements, and raised domestic spending and the deficit will explode under this. This is the unholy alliance that people need to know about between right and left. Right and left are spending us into oblivion. We should use the debt ceiling, as precisely to Don, to force upon them budgetary reforms.HARWOOD: Senator, if what you just said is true, why did Speaker Boehner craft this deal and why did Paul Ryan, who has a strong reputation for fiscal discipline, vote for it?PAUL: Well, that’s a real question. Is there going to be any change in the House with new leadership? I frankly don’t think there will be much change because I think what’s going to happen is you’re going to get more of the same. People in Washington think they were sent there to be adults and govern and do all this. Well, you know what I’m worried about? Not keeping the government open. I’m worried about bankrupting the American people.We’re borrowing a million dollars a minute. That is important. And that’s what we have to contrast. Keeping the government open and continuing to borrow a million dollars a minute.(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator (inaudible).QUICK: Governor Christie, I’d like to (inaudible) a question next. Actually, I have a question for you (inaudible).In your tell it like it is campaign, you’ve said a lot of tough things. You’ve said that we need to raise the retirement age for Social Security. You think that we need to cut benefits for people who make over $80,000 and eliminate them entirely for seniors who are making over $200,000.Governor Huckabee, who is here on the stage, has said that you and others who think this way are trying to rob seniors of the benefits that they’ve earned. It raises the question: When it is acceptable to break a social compact?RITCHIE: Well, I wish you would have asked that question years ago when they broke it. I mean, let me be honest with the people who are watching at home. The government has lied to you and they have stolen from you. They told you that your Social Security money is in a trust fund. All that’s in that trust fund is a pile of IOUs for money they spent on something else a long time ago.And they’ve stolen from you because now they know they cannot pay these benefits and Social Security is going to be insolvent in seven to eight years. We’re sitting up here talking about all these other things; 71 percent of federal spending today is on entitlements, and debt service. And, that’s with zero percent interest rates.Now, I’m the only person that’s put out a detailed plan on how to deal with entitlements. And we’ll save a trillion dollars over the next 10 years. And, here’s the difference between me and Hillary Clinton. What Hillary Clinton’s going to say, and has said before is, she wants to raise Social Security taxes.Now, let me ask you a question everybody, and, this is for the guy, you know, who owns a landscaping business out there. If somebody’s already stolen money from you, are you going to give them more? Or, are you going to deal with the problem by saying, I’m going to give people who’ve done well in this country less benefit on the backend. We need to get realistic about this. We’re not — the American people — forget about anything else, they’ve already been lied to and stolen from. And...QUICK: ...Governor...CHRISTIE: ...I’m going to go to Washington to stop it...QUICK: ...Thank you.QUINTANILLA: We promised we would get to everyone this block. Governor Huckabee, I’m going to give you 60 seconds on this.HUCKABEE: Well, I would really appreciate that. First of all, yes, we’ve stolen. Yes, we’ve lied to the American people about Social Security, and Medicare.But, you know what we’re not telling them? It’s their money. This isn’t the governments money. This is not entitlement, it’s not welfare. This is money that people have confiscated out of their paychecks. Everytime they got a paycheck, the government reached in and took something out of it before they ever saw it. Now, we’re going to blame the people.Today congress decided to take another $150 billion dollars away from Social Security so they can borrow more money. That makes no sense to everybody. And, they’re always going to say, “Well, we’re going to fix this one day.”No their not. It’s like a 400 pound man saying, “I’m going to go on a diet, but I’m eating a sack of Krispy Kremes before I do.”And, people are sick of believing that the government is never going to really address this. But, let me tell you who not to blame. Let’s quit blaming the people on Social Security. Let’s quit making it a problem for them. It’s like them getting mugged, and then us saying, well, we’re going to mug you some more. You ought to just be able to get over it, get used to it...QUINTANILLA: ...Governor...HUCKABEE: ...No, sir...QUINTANILLA: ...Thank you, Governor...HUCKABEE: ...we need to honor our promises...(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: ...Senator Cruz...HUCKABEE: ...before I go. This is the only time I’ve had a chance, let me finish.QUINTANILLA: OK, alright.HUCKABEE: ...This is a matter not of math, this is a matter of morality. If this country that does not keep its promise to seniors then what promise can this country hope to be trusted to keep? And, the fact is, none of them.(CROSSTALK)MALE: And, by the way, Carl...(APPLAUSE)HUCKABEE: And, the only way — no...(CROSSTALK)CHRISTIE: ...The only way we’re going to be morale, the only way we’re going to keep our promise to seniors is start by following the first rule we should all follow, which is to look at them, treat them like adults, and tell them the truth.It isn’t there anymore, Mike. They stole it. It got stolen from them. It’s not theirs anymore. The government stole it, and spent it a long time ago... HUCKABEE: ...Chris...CHRISTIE: So, let’s stop fooling around about this, let’s tell people the truth. For once, let’s do that, and stop trying to give them some kind of fantasy that’s never going to come true.QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz...HUCKABEE: ...Chris...QUINTANILLA: ...Before we go to break, we’re clearly not having that beer you mentioned, but I’ll give you 30 more seconds...CRUZ: ...Then I’ll buy you a tequila...QUINTANILLA: OK.CRUZ: ...Or, even some famous Colorado brownies.QUINTANILLA: I’ll give you 30 seconds to respond...(CHEERING)QUINTANILLA: (INAUDIBLE)HUCKABEE: Since he brought me up, do I not get to respond?QUINTANILLA: Respond on the debt limit, or an answer to the governor, which ever you choose.CRUZ: Well, sure. This deal in Washington is an example of why Washington’s broken. Republican leadership joined with every single Democrat, add $80 trillion to our debt to do nothing to fix the problems.And, let me now on Social Security because we were getting into a good substantive exchange, and I want to say I think both Chris, and Mike are right. Governor Huckabee’s exactly right, we need to honor the promises made to our seniors, but for younger workers — look. I’m 44 years old.It is hard to find someone in my generation that thinks Social Security will be there for us. We can save and preserve and strengthen Social Security by making no changes for seniors, but for younger workers gradually increasing the retirement age, changing the rate of growth so that it matches inflation, and critically allowing younger workers to keep a portion of our tax payments in a personal account that we own, we control them, we can pass on to our kids.QUINTANILLA: 30 seconds, Governor Huckabee.HUCKABEE: John, listen, let’s keep in mind that for one-third of the 60 million Americans on Social Security it represents 90 percent of their income. And, when I hear people talking about means testing, let’s just remember what that means. If we means test Social Security, it means that the government decides whether or not I deserve it. If a person lives in a seven room house, does the government get to say you don’t need seven rooms, we’re going to take two of them away?HUCKABEE: Folks, the government has no business stealing even more from the people who have paid this in. I just want to remind you, people paid their money. They expect to have it. And, if this government doesn’t pay it, than tell me what’s different between the government and Bernie Madolf, who sits in prison today for doing less than what the government has done to the people on social security and Medicare in this country.(APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: Governor, thank you. We will take a break. The Republican Presidential debate, live from Boulder, Colorado, coming back after a break on CNBC.(APPLAUSE)(COMMERCIAL BREAK)QUICK: Welcome back to the presidential debate for the Republicans. We are live in Boulder, Colorado, right here on CNBC.Folks, we’ll get right back into this.Mr. Trump, let’s talk a little bit about bankruptcies. Your Atlantic City casinos filed for bankruptcy four times. In fact, Fitch, the ratings agency, even said that they were serial filers for all of this. You said that you did great with Atlantic City, and you did. But some of the individuals — the bondholders, some of the contractors who worked for you, didn’t fare so well.Bankruptcy is a broken promise. Why should the voters believe the promises that you’re telling them right now?TRUMP: Well, first of all, like many other very big businessmen, I could name them here, but I’m not going to do that for a lot of obvious reasons, but the biggest, and almost all of them, they’ve all used the chapter laws, the bankruptcy laws to their own benefit.Before this, I was a very successful person as a developer and as a businessman. Atlantic City has gone bad. I mean, Chris will know about that. I’m not blaming Chris, by the way, but he will know about that. Caesar’s — excuse me — Caesar’s, the Rolls-Royce, as you know, is in bankruptcy. Almost every hotel in Atlantic City has either been in bankruptcy or will be in bankruptcy — the biggest.But also the biggest people (ph) — now I’ve used that to my advantage as a business man, for my family, for myself. I never filed for bankruptcy. But many, many people did. What happened with Atlantic City is very, very disgraceful.Now hundreds of companies I’ve opened. I’ve used it three times, maybe four times. Came out great. But I guess I’m supposed to come out great. That is what I could do for the country. We owe $19 trillion, boy am I good at solving debt problems. Nobody can solve it like me.But I will tell you this, Atlantic City, you’re using that, hundreds of companies that I have opened have thrived. I built a net worth of way over $10 billion, and I have done it four times out of hundreds. And I’m glad I did it.I used the laws of the country to my benefit, I’m sorry.QUICK: Mr. Trump, thank you.TRUMP: Thank you.CRAMER: Dr. Carson, in recent weeks, a number of pharmaceutical companies has been accused of profiteering, for dramatically raising the prices of life-saving drugs. You have spent a lifetime in medicine.Have these companies gone too far? Should the government be involved in controlling some of these price increases?CARSON: Well, there is no question that some people go overboard when it comes to trying to make profits, and they don’t take into consideration the American people. What we have to start thinking about, as leaders, particularly in government, is what can we do for the average American? And you think about the reasons that we’re having such difficulty right now with our job market.Well, the average small manufacturer, whatever they’re manufacturing, drugs or anything, if they have less than 50 employees, the average cost in terms of regulations is $34,000 per employee. Makes it a whole lot easier for them to want to go somewhere else.So what we’re going to have to start doing instead of, you know, picking on this group or this group, is we’re going to have to have a major reduction in the regulatory influence that is going on.The government is not supposed to be in every part of our lives, and that is what is causing the problem.CRAMER: Thank you, Dr. Carson.Governor Christie, there has been a lot of political rhetoric that some bank executives should have gone to jail for the 2008 financial crisis.But General Motors paid more than $1 billion in fines and settlements for its ignition switch defect. One hundred and twenty- four people died as a result of these faulty switches. No one went to jail.As a former prosecutor, do you believe the people responsible for the switch and the cover-up belong behind bars?CHRISTIE: You bet they do. And if I were the prosecutor, that is exactly where they would be. The fact is that this Justice Department under this president has been a political Justice Department.It has been a Justice Department that decided that they want to pick who the winners and losers are. They like General Motors, so they give them a pass. They don’t like somebody else like David Petraeus, they prosecute them and send a decorated general on to disgrace. It’s a political Justice Department.And, Jim, you know full well that in the seven years I was U.S. attorney we went after pharmaceutical companies. We went after companies that were ripping off shareholders. We went after companies that were doing things that were against the law.And to expand on Mr. Carson’s — or Dr. Carson’s question, let’s face it, we have laws already. We don’t need newer (ph) laws. We don’t need Hillary Clinton’s price controls for — again, does anybody out there think that giving Washington, D.C., the opportunity to run the pharmaceutical industry is a good idea, given how well they have done running the government?So what we do, though, is, if there is somebody who is price- gouging, we have laws for prosecutors to take that on. Let’s let a Justice Department — and I will make an attorney general who will enforce the law and make justice more than just a word. It will be a way of life.CRAMER: Thank you, Governor Christie.HARWOOD: Jim, thanks.Governor Bush, in a debate like this four years ago, every Republican running for president pledged to oppose a budget deal containing any tax increase even if it had spending cuts ten times as large.A few months later, you told Congress, put me in, coach, you said you would take that deal. Still feel that way?BUSH: Well, the deal was done. Barack Obama got his massive tax increase, and there was no spending cuts. You just see the recent deal announced today or yesterday, more spending, more tax increasing, more regulation. And now we have to accept 2 percent, the new normal for economic growth.And the net result is the middle class has $2,300 less in their pockets than the day that Barack Obama got elected president. And now they see Hillary Clinton proposing a third term of economic policy for our country.We need to reverse that. And my record was one of cutting taxes each and every year. You don’t have to guess about it, because I actually have a record. $19 billion of tax cuts, 1.3 million jobs created. We were one of two states to go to AAA bond rating, and our government spending was far less than the spending in people’s income.HARWOOD: But to — to the point that you made to Congress, if you were president and you were offered a bipartisan deal that had one dollar...BUSH: You find me...HARWOOD: ...one dollar of tax increases per ten dollars of spending cuts, would you take it?BUSH: You find me a Democrat — you find me a Democrat that will cut spending ten dollars? Heck, find me a Republican in Congress that would cut spending ten dollars. I’ll talk to them.HARWOOD: So you don’t want the coach to put you in any more?BUSH: Look, the — the deal is already done. The biggest tax increase happened under the watch of Barack Obama, and spending’s gone up. You find a Democrat that’s for cutting taxes — cutting spending ten dollars, I’ll give them a warm kiss.(LAUGHTER)HARWOOD: Thank you, governor.Carl?QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina, in 2010, while running for Senate in Tech Ridge (ph), California, you called an Internet sales tax a bad idea. Traditional brick and mortar stores obviously disagree. Now that the Internet shopping playing field has matured, what would be a fair plan to even that playing field?FIORINA: You know, I want to go back for a moment to what we were just talking about. Crony capitalism is alive and well, and has been so in Washington, D.C. for decades.What’s crony capitalism? Crony capitalism is what happens when government gets so big and so powerful that only the big and the powerful can handle it.So why are the pharmaceutical companies consolidating? Why are there five even bigger Wall Street banks now, instead of the ten we used to have on Wall Street? Because when government gets big and powerful, the big feel like they need to get even bigger to deal with all that power, and meanwhile, the small and the powerless — in this case, 1,590 community banks — go out of business.You see, folks, this is how socialism starts. Government causes a problem, and then government steps in to solve the problem. This is why, fundamentally, we have to take our government back.The student loan problem has been created by government. Government trying to level the playing field between Internet and brick-and-mortar creates a problem. The FCC jumping in now and saying, “we’re going to put 400 pages of regulation over the Internet,” is going to create massive problems.But guess who pushed for that regulation? The big Internet companies. This is what’s going on. Big and powerful use big and powerful government to their advantage.It’s why you see Walgreens buying Rite Aid. It’s why you see the pharmaceuticals getting together. It’s you see the health insurance companies getting together. It’s why you see the banks consolidating.And meanwhile, small businesses are getting crushed. Community- based businesses and farms are getting crushed. Community banks are going out of business. Big government favors the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected, and crushes the small and the powerless.QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina.FIORINA: It is why we have to simplify. It is why we have to reduce the size and power of government.QUINTANILLA: OK.FIORINA: It’s the only way to level the playing field between big and powerful and small and powerless.QUINTANILLA: Thank you very much.(APPLAUSE) QUICK: Senator Rubio, you yourself have said that you’ve had issues. You have a lack of bookkeeping skills. You accidentally inter-mingled campaign money with your personal money. You faced (ph) foreclosure on a second home that you bought. And just last year, you liquidated a $68,000 retirement fund. That’s something that cost you thousands of dollars in taxes and penalties.In terms of all of that, it raises the question whether you have the maturity and wisdom to lead this $17 trillion economy. What do you say?RUBIO: Well, you just — you just listed a litany of discredited attacks from Democrats and my political opponents, and I’m not gonna waste 60 seconds detailing them all. But I’m going to tell you the truth.Here’s the truth. I didn’t inherit any money. My dad was a bartender, my mother was a maid. They worked hard to provide us the chance at a better life.They didn’t save enough money for us to go to school. I had to work my way through school. I had to borrow money to go to school. I tried (ph), early in my marriage, explaining to my wife why someone named Sallie Mae was taking $1,000 out of our bank account every month.(LAUGHTER)I know what it’s like to owe that money, and we’ve worked hard. We’ve worked hard our whole life to provide a better family — a better life for our family.We own a home four blocks away from the place that I grew up in. My four children have been able to receive a good Christian education, and I’ve been able to save for them to go to college so they never have to have the loans that I did.But I’m not worried about my finances, I’m worried about the finances of everyday Americans who today are struggling in an economy that is not producing good paying jobs while everything else costs more. And that’s what this economy needs to — that’s what this debate needs to be about.This debate needs to be about the men and women across this country that are struggling on a daily basis to provide for their families the better future that we’ve always said this country is all about.QUICK: Senator, I understand all of that. I had a lot of student loans when I got out, too. But you’ve had a windfall that a lot of Americans haven’t. You made over a million dollars on a book deal, and some of these problems came after that.RUBIO: And I used it to pay off my loans. And it’s available on paperback, if you’re interested in buying my book.(APPLAUSE)QUICK: But you — but you liquidated that retirement account after the fact, and that cost you about $24,000 out of that in taxes and feed. That — that was after you’d already come into that windfall. That’s why I raised the question.RUBIO: Yeah, again, as I said, we’re raising a family in the 21st century and it’s one of the reasons why my tax plan is a pro- family tax plan.It increases the per child tax credit, because I didn’t read about this in a book. I know for a fact how difficult it is to raise children, how expensive it’s become for working families. And I make a lot more than the average American. Imagine how hard it is for these people out there that are making 40, 50, $60,000 a year, and they’re trying to provide for their families at a time when this economy is not growing.We can’t afford another four years of that. Which is what we’re gonna get if we elect a big government liberal like Hillary Clinton to the White House.Thank you, senator.HARWOOD: Governor John Kasich, you’ve called for abolishing the Export Import Bank, which provides subsidies to help American companies compete with overseas competitors. You call that corporate welfare.One of the largest newspapers in your state wrote an editorial, said they found that strange, writing, that if that’s corporate welfare, what does Kasich call the millions of dollars in financial incentives doled out to attract or retain jobs by his development effort — jobs Ohio.If subsidies are good enough for Ohio companies, why aren’t they good enough for companies trying to compete overseas?KASICH: Well, first of all, when we talk about the Import Export Bank, it’s time to clean up corporate welfare. If we’re gonna reform welfare for poor people, we ought to reform it for rich people, as well. Secondly, in our state, we went from a loss of 350,000 jobs to, now, a gain of 347,000 jobs to the positive. Our wages are growing faster than the national average, and I’ve cut taxes more than any sitting governor in this state — $5 billion, including no taxes on small business and killing the death tax.I want to go back to what we were talking about earlier, this budget deal in Washington.This is the same old stuff since I left.You spend the money today and then you hope you’re going to save money tomorrow.I don’t know if people understand, but I spent a lifetime with my colleagues getting us to a federal balanced budget. We actually did it. And I have a road map and a plan right now to get us to balance.Reforming entitlements, cutting taxes. You see, because if you really want to get to a balanced budget, you need to reduce your expenses and you need to grow your economy. So what I will tell you about our incentives — our incentives are tight, and at the end of the day we make sure that we gain more from the creation of jobs than what we lose.And you know what? Ohio, one of the best growing places in the country — I not only did it in Washington, I did it in Ohio, and I’ll go back to Washington, and there will be no more silly deals...HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.KASICH: ... If I become President because we’ll have a Constitutional Amendment to require a federally balanced budget so they will do their job.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor. Thank you.QUICK: Yes, thank you John.Senator Cruz, working women in this country still earn just 77 percent of what men earn. And I know that you’ve said you’ve been very sympathetic to our cause. But you’ve also you said that the Democrats’ moves to try and change this are the political show votes.I just wonder what you would do as President to try and help in this cause?CRUZ: Well, we’ve gotta turn the economy around for people who are struggling.The Democrats’ answer to everything is more government control over wages, and more empowering trial lawyers to file lawsuits.You know, you look at women working. I’ll tell you, in my family there are a lot of single moms in my family. My sister was a single mom, both of my aunts who were a single moms. My mom who’s here today, was a single mom when my father left us when I was 3 years old.Now, thank God, my father was invited to a Bible study and became born again and he came back to my mom and me and we were raised together. But I — the struggle of single moms is extraordinary. And you know, when you see Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders and all the Democrats talking about wanting to address the plight of working women, not a one of them mentioned the fact that under Barack Obama, 3.7 million women have entered poverty.Not a one of them mentioned the fact that under Barack Obama and the big government economy, the median wage for women has dropped $733. The the truth of the matter is, big government benefits the wealthy, it benefits the lobbyists, it benefits the giant corporations. And the people who are getting hammered are small businesses, it’s single moms, it’s Hispanics. That is who I’m fighting for. The people that Washington leaves behind.(CROSSTALK)FIORINA: Becky, it is the height of hypocrisy for Mrs. Clinton to talk about being the first woman President, when every single policy she espouses, and every single policy of President Obama has been demonstrably bad for women.FIORINA: 92 percent — 92 percent of the jobs lost during Barack Obama’s first term belonged to women. Senator Cruz is precisely right. Three million women have fallen into poverty under this administration. The number of women —QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina —FIORINA: — living in extreme poverty is the highest level on record. I am a conservative because I know our values, our principles and our policies —QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina, we will come back to you.FIORINA: — work better to lift everyone up, men and women.QUICK: Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina. Carl?(APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: Dr. Carson, we know you as a physician, but we wanted to ask you about your involvement on some corporate boards, including Costco’s. Last year, a marketing study called the warehouse retailer the number one gay-friendly brand in America, partly because of its domestic partner benefits.Why would you serve on a company whose policies seem to run counter to your views on homosexuality?CARSON: Well, obviously, you don’t understand my views on homosexuality. I believe that our Constitution protects everybody, regardless of their sexual orientation or any other aspect. I also believe that marriage is between one man and one woman. And there is no reason that you can’t be perfectly fair to the gay community.They shouldn’t automatically assume that because you believe that marriage is between one man and one woman that you are a homophobe. And this is one of the myths that the left perpetrates on our society, and this is how they frighten people and get people to shut up. You know, that’s what the PC culture is all about, and it’s destroying this nation.The fact of the matter is we the American people are not each other’s enemies, it’s those people who are trying to divide us who are the enemies. And we need to make that very clear to everybody.(APPLAUSE) QUINTANILLA: One more question. This is a company called Mannatech, a maker of nutritional supplements, with which you had a 10-year relationship. They offered claims that they could cure autism, cancer, they paid $7 million to settle a deceptive marketing lawsuit in Texas, and yet you’re involvement continued. Why?CARSON: Well, that’s easy to answer. I didn’t have an involvement with them. That is total propaganda, and this is what happens in our society. Total propaganda.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I did a couple of speeches for them, I do speeches for other people. They were paid speeches. It is absolutely absurd to say that I had any kind of a relationship with them.Do I take the product? Yes. I think it’s a good product.QUINTANILLA: To be fair, you were on the homepage of their website with the logo over your shoulder —CARSON: If somebody put me on their homepage, they did it without my permission.QUINTANILLA: Does that not speak to your vetting process or judgment in any way.CARSON: No, it speaks to the fact that I don’t know those —(AUDIENCE BOOS)See? They know.(APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: Apparently. We will take a break. We’ll be back in Boulder in just a minute.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)HARWOOD: Welcome back to the Republican presidential debate on CNBC, live from Boulder, Colorado at the University of Colorado.Senator Huckabee, I mean — excuse me — Senator Rubio, Wired magazine recently carried the heading, “Marco Rubio wants to be the tech industry’s savior.” It noted your support for dramatically increasing immigration visas called H1B, which are designed for workers with the special skills that Silicon Valley wants.But your Senate colleague, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, says in reality, the tech industry uses this program to undercut hiring and wages for highly qualified Americans. Why is he wrong?RUBIO: Well, first of all, if a company gets caught doing that, they should never be able to use the program again. If you get caught abusing this program, you should never be able to use it again.The second thing I said is we need to add reforms, not just increase the numbers, but add reforms. For example, before you hire anyone from abroad, you should have to advertise that job for 180 days. You also have to prove that you’re going to pay these people more than you would pay someone else, so that you’re not undercutting it by bringing in cheap labor.But here’s the best solution of all. We need to get back to training people in this country to do the jobs of the 21st century. Why, for the life of me, I do not understand why did we stop doing vocational education in America, people that can work with their hands; people you can train to do this work while they’re still in high school so they can graduate ready to go work. But the best way to close this gap is to modernize higher education so Americans have the skills for those jobs. But in the interim, in the absence of that, what’s happening is some of these tech companies are taking those — those centers (ph) to Canada because they can get people to go over there instead of here.But the ideal scenario is to train Americans to do the work so we don’t have to rely on people from abroad.HARWOOD: It sounds like you think Senator Sessions is wrong to believe there is enough abuse in that program that we shouldn’t...(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: Well, I believe that there are abuses, those companies should be permanently barred from ever using the program again and we should put strict standards in place to ensure that they’re not being abused, like the prevailing wage requirement and like the advertising requirement.HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator.Becky?QUICK: Mr. Trump, let’s stay on this issue of immigration. You have been very critical of Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook who has wanted to increase the number of these H1Bs.TRUMP: I was not at all critical of him. I was not at all. In fact, frankly, he’s complaining about the fact that we’re losing some of the most talented people. They go to Harvard. They go to Yale. They go to Princeton. They come from another country and they’re immediately sent out.I am all in favor of keeping these talented people here so they can go to work in Silicon Valley.QUICK: So you’re in favor of...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: So I have nothing at all critical of him.‘ QUICK: Where did I read this and come up with this that you were...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: Probably, I don’t know — you people write the stuff. I don’t know where you...(LAUGHTER)(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: And if I could say just one thing. I am the only person in either campaign that’s self-funding. I’m putting up 100 percent of my own money. And right now, I will be putting up a tremendous — so far, I’ve put up less than anybody and I have the best results. Wouldn’t that be nice if the country could do that?But I will be putting — I will be putting up, you know, tremendous amounts of money. SuperPacs are a disaster. They’re a scam. They cause dishonesty. And you better get rid of them because they are causing a lot of bad decisions to be made by some very good people. And I’m not blaming these folks — well, I guess I could.(LAUGHTER)Very good people are making very bad decisions right now. And if anything comes out of this whole thing with some of these nasty and ridiculous questions, I will tell you, you better get rid of the SuperPacs because they causing a big problem with this country, not only in dishonesty and what’s going on, but also in a lot of bad decisions that have been made for the benefit of lobbyists and special interests.QUICK: You know, Mr. — you know, Mr. Trump, if I may (inaudible). You’ve been — you have been — you had talked a little bit about Marco Rubio. I think you called him Mark Zuckerberg’s personal senator because he was in favor of the H1B.TRUMP: I never said that. I never said that.QUICK: So this was an erroneous article the whole way around?TRUMP: You’ve got another gentleman in Florida, who happens to be a very nice guy, but not...QUICK: My apologies. I’m sorry.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: ... he’s really doing some bad...(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: Since I’ve been mentioned, can I respond?(CROSSTALK)QUICK: Yes, you can.RUBIO: OK. I know the Democrats have the ultimate SuperPac. It’s called the mainstream media who every single day...(APPLAUSE)... and I’ll tell you why. Last week, Hillary Clinton went before a committee. She admitted she had sent e-mails to her family saying, “Hey, this attack at Benghazi was caused by Al Qaida-like elements.” She spent over a week telling the families of those victims and the American people that it was because of a video. And yet the mainstream media is going around saying it was the greatest week in Hillary Clinton’s campaign.It was the week she got exposed as a liar. It was the week that she got exposed as a liar...(APPLAUSE)But she has her super PAC helping her out, the American mainstream media.QUICK: Senator Rubio, thank you very much.I would like to introduce my colleague, Rick Santelli, he has some comments as well, sir.SANTELLI: Senator Cruz, let’s focus on our central bank, the Federal Reserve. You’ve been a fierce critic of the Fed, arguing for more transparency. Where do you want to take that?Do you want to get Congress involved in monetary policy, or is it time to slap the Fed back and downsize them completely? What are your thoughts? What do you believe?CRUZ: Well, Rick, it’s a very important question. I have got deep concerns about the Fed. The first thing I think we need to do is audit the Fed. And I am an original co-sponsor of Rand Paul’s audit the Fed legislation.The second thing we need to do is I think we need to bring together a bipartisan commission to look at getting back to rules- based monetary policy, end this star chamber that has been engaging in this incredible experiment of quantitative easing, QE1, QE2, QE3, QE- infinity.And the people who are being impacted, you know, a question that was asked earlier, Becky asked, was about working women. You know, it’s interesting, you look at on Wall Street, the Fed is doing great. It’s driving up stock prices. Wall Street is doing great.You know, today, the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our income than any year since 1928. But if you look at working men and women. If you look at a single mom buying groceries, she sees hamburger prices have gone up nearly 40 percent.She sees her cost of electricity going up. She sees her health insurance going up. And loose money is one of the major problems. We need sound money. And I think the Fed should get out of the business of trying to juice our economy and simply be focused on sound money and monetary stability, ideally tied to gold.SANTELLI: Senator Paul, the same question to you.PAUL: Well, thank you very much. I would like to thank Ted for co-sponsoring my bill, audit the Fed. And I think it’s precisely because of the arrogance of someone like Ben Bernanke, who now calls us all know-nothings, that is precisely why we need audit the Fed.I think it is really very much a huge problem that an organization as powerful as the Fed comes in, lobbies against them being audited on the Hill. I would prevent them lobbying Congress. I don’t think the Fed should be involved with lobbying us.I think we should examine how the Fed has really been part of the problem. You want to study income inequality, let’s bring the Fed forward and talk about Fed policy and how it causes income inequality.Let’s also bring the Fed forward and have them explain how they caused the housing boom and the crisis, and what they’ve done to make us better or worse. I think the Fed has been a great problem in our society.What you need to do is free up interest rates. Interest rates are the price of money, and we shouldn’t have price controls on the price of money.SANTELLI: Thank you, Senator.(APPLAUSE)Dr. Carson, you told The Des Moines Register that you don’t like government subsidies, it interferes with the free market. But you’ve also said that you’re in favor of taking oil subsidies and putting them towards ethanol processing.Isn’t that just swapping one subsidy for another, Doctor?CARSON: Well, first of all, I was wrong about taking the oil subsidy. I have...... the best results, wouldn’t that be nice if the country could do that?But I will be putting — I will be putting up, you know, tremendous amounts of money. Super PACs are a disaster. They’re a scam. They cause dishonesty. And you had better get rid of them, because they are causing a lot of bad decisions to be made by some very good people.And I’m not blaming these folks — but I guess I could.(LAUGHTER)Very good people are making very bad decisions right now. And if anything comes out of this whole thing with some of these nasty and ridiculous questions, I will tell you, you had better get rid of the super PACs, because they’re causing a big problem with this country, not only in dishonesty and what’s going on, but also in a lot of bad decisions that are being made for the benefit of lobbyists and special interests.(CROSSTALK)QUICK: You know, Mr. Trump, if I may...(CROSSTALK)QUICK: Just a minute, Ms. Fiorina, let me follow up on this for just a moment.You talked a little bit about Marco Rubio. I think you called him “Mark Zuckerberg’s personal senator” because he was in favor H- 1B...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: I never said that. I never said that.QUICK: So this was an erroneous article the whole way around?TRUMP: He has got another gentleman in Florida, who happens to be a very nice guy, but not...QUICK: My apologies. I’m sorry...(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: Everybody is really doing some bad fact...RUBIO: Since I’ve been mentioned, can I respond?QUICK: Yes. Yes, you may.RUBIO: OK. You know, the Democrats who have the ultimate super PAC, it’s called the mainstream media. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)And I’ll tell you why, last week, Hillary Clinton went before a committee, she admitted she had sent emails to her family saying, hey, this attack in Benghazi was caused by al Qaeda-like elements.She spent over a week telling the families of those victims and the American people that it was because of a video. And yet the mainstream media is going around saying it was the greatest week in Hillary Clinton’s campaign.It was the week she got exposed as a liar. It was the week that she got exposed as a liar...(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)But she has her super PAC helping her out, the American mainstream media.QUICK: Senator Rubio, thank you very much.I would like to introduce my colleague, Rick Santelli, he has some comments as well, sir.SANTELLI: Senator Cruz, let’s focus on our central bank, the Federal Reserve. You’ve been a fierce critic of the Fed, arguing for more transparency. Where do you want to take that?Do you want to get Congress involved in monetary policy, or is it time to slap the Fed back and downsize them completely? What are your thoughts? What do you believe?CRUZ: Well, Rick, it’s a very important question. I have got deep concerns about the Fed. The first thing I think we need to do is audit the Fed. And I am an original co-sponsor of Rand Paul’s audit the Fed legislation.The second thing we need to do is I think we need to bring together a bipartisan commission to look at getting back to rules- based monetary policy, end this star chamber that has been engaging in this incredible experiment of quantitative easing, QE1, QE2, QE3, QE- infinity.And the people who are being impacted, you know, a question that was asked earlier, Becky asked, was about working women. You know, it’s interesting, you look at on Wall Street, the Fed is doing great. It’s driving up stock prices. Wall Street is doing great.You know, today, the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our income than any year since 1928. But if you look at working men and women. If you look at a single mom buying groceries, she sees hamburger prices have gone up nearly 40 percent.She sees her cost of electricity going up. She sees her health insurance going up. And loose money is one of the major problems. We need sound money. And I think the Fed should get out of the business of trying to juice our economy and simply be focused on sound money and monetary stability, ideally tied to gold.SANTELLI: Senator Paul, the same question to you.PAUL: Well, thank you very much. I would like to thank Ted for co-sponsoring my bill, audit the Fed. And I think it’s precisely because of the arrogance of someone like Ben Bernanke, who now calls us all know-nothings, that is precisely why we need audit the Fed.I think it is really very much a huge problem that an organization as powerful as the Fed comes in, lobbies against them being audited on the Hill. I would prevent them lobbying Congress. I don’t think the Fed should be involved with lobbying us.I think we should examine how the Fed has really been part of the problem. You want to study income inequality, let’s bring the Fed forward and talk about Fed policy and how it causes income inequality.Let’s also bring the Fed forward and have them explain how they caused the housing boom and the crisis, and what they’ve done to make us better or worse. I think the Fed has been a great problem in our society.What you need to do is free up interest rates. Interest rates are the price of money, and we shouldn’t have price controls on the price of money.SANTELLI: Thank you, Senator.(APPLAUSE)Dr. Carson, you told The Des Moines Register that you don’t like government subsidies, it interferes with the free market. But you’ve also said that you’re in favor of taking oil subsidies and putting them towards ethanol processing.Isn’t that just swapping one subsidy for another, Doctor?CARSON: Well, first of all, I was wrong about taking the oil subsidy. I have studied that issue in great detail. And what I have concluded is that the best policy is to get rid of all government subsidies, and get the government out of our lives, and let people rise and fall based on how good they are.And — you know, all of this too big to fail stuff and picking and choosing winners and losers — this is a bunch of crap, and it is really causing a great deal of — great deal of problems for our society right now.And — and — you know, it goes back to the whole concept of regulations, which are in everything. The reason that I — I hate them so much is because every single regulation costs in terms of goods and services.That cost gets passed on to the people. Now, who are the people who are hurt by that? It’s poor people and middle class. Doesn’t hurt rich people if their bar of soap goes up ten cents, but it hurts the poor and the middle class.And Bernie Sanders will tell them that it’s because of the rich. Well, I’ll tell you something: you can take everything from the top 1 percent, and you apply it to our fiscal gap, and you won’t even make a dent in it.SANTELLI: Thank you, Doctor.Becky?QUICK: Rick, thank you very much.Governor Huckabee, you have railed against income inequality. You’ve said that some Wall Street executives should have gone to jail over the roles that they played during the financial crisis.Apart from your tax plan, are there specific steps you would require from corporate America to try and reduce the income inequality.HUCKABEE: I don’t think it’s so much about when the government orders a corporation to do something. In fact, that’s part of the problem. If you saw that blimp that got cut loose from Maryland today, it’s a perfect example of government.I mean, what we had was something the government made — basically a bag of gas — that cut loose, destroyed everything in its path, left thousands of people powerless, but they couldn’t get rid of it because we had too much money invested in it, so we had to keep it.That is our government today. We saw it in the blimp.(APPLAUSE)That’s exactly what we saw. So look, corporations ought to exercise some responsibility. When CEO income has risen 90 percent above the average worker, when the bottom 90 percent of this country’s economy has had stagnant wages for the past 40 years, somebody is taking it in the teeth.And it’s not the folks on Wall Street. I’m not anti-Wall Street, but I don’t believe the government ought to wear a team jersey, pick winners and losers.QUICK: Governor?HUCKABEE: The government ought to wear a striped shirt and just make sure the game...QUICK: Governor?HUCKABEE: ...is paid — played fairly.QUICK: Thank you. Now, everybody else has fudged their time and gone over, so please, don’t cut me off too quick, Becky.QUICK: All right, Governor Huckabee.HUCKABEE: Let me just close it out this way.QUICK: How about 15 more seconds?HUCKABEE: We need to be focusing on what fixes this country. And I’ll tell you one thing that we never talk about — we haven’t talked about it tonight.Why aren’t we talking about — instead of cutting benefits for old people, cutting benefits for sick people — why don’t we say, “let’s cure the four big cost-driving diseases...QUICK: Governor?HUCKABEE: ...”diabetes, heart disease, cancer and Alzheimer’s?”QUICK: Governor, I’m sorry...HUCKABEE: If you do that, you don’t just change the economy, you transform the lives of millions of hurting Americans.QUICK: Governor, thank you.HUCKABEE: Gosh, I’d love for us to talk about something like that. Thank you. QUICK: Governor, thank you. Appreciate it.John?HARWOOD: Governor Bush, the tax reform bill that Ronald Reagan signed in 1986 cut the top personal income tax rate to 28 percent — just like your plan does. But President Reagan taxed capital gains at the same rate, while you would tax them at just 20 percent.Given the problems we’ve been discussing, growing gap between rich and poor, why would you tax labor at a higher rate than income from investments?BUSH: Look, the — the simple fact is that my plan actually gives the middle class the greatest break: $2,000 per family. And if you make $40,000 a year, a family of four, you don’t pay any income tax at all.Simplifying the code and lowering rates, both for corporations and — and personal rates, is exactly what we need to do. You think about the regulatory cost and the tax cost — that’s why small businesses are closing, rather than being formed in our country right now.The big corporations have the scale to deal with all of this. And what I think all of us are saying is, our monetary policy, our tax policy, regulatory policy needs to be radically changed so we can create high sustained growth for income to rise.The government has tried it their way. Under — under Barack Obama and the proposals of Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders and others, they’ve tried it their way, and it has failed miserably.We need to take a new approach of taxing — reforming how we tax, and reforming the regulations in our — in our country before it’s too late.HARWOOD: Senator Rubio, 30 seconds to you.The Tax Foundation, which was alluded to earlier, scored your tax plan and concluded that you give nearly twice as much of a gain in after-tax income to the top 1 percent as to people in the middle of the income scale.Since you’re the champion of Americans living paycheck-to- paycheck, don’t you have that backward?RUBIO: No, that’s — you’re wrong. In fact, the largest after- tax gains is for the people at the lower end of the tax spectrum under my plan. And there’s a bunch of things my tax plan does to help them.Number one, you have people in this country that...HARWOOD: The Tax Foundation — just to be clear, they said the...(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: ...you wrote a story on it, and you had to go back and correct it.HARWOOD: No, I did not.RUBIO: You did. No, you did.(APPLAUSE)(CROSSTALK)HARWOOD: Senator, the Tax Foundation said after-tax income for the top 1 percent under your plan would go up 27.9 percent.RUBIO: Well, you’re talking about — yeah.HARWOOD: And people in the middle of the income spectrum, about 15 percent.RUBIO: Yeah, but that — because the math is, if you — 5 percent of a million is a lot more than 5 percent of a thousand. So yeah, someone who makes more money...HARWOOD: (inaudible)RUBIO: ...numerically, it’s gonna be higher. But the greatest gains, percentage-wise, for people, are gonna be at the lower end of our plan, and here’s why: because in addition to a general personal exemption, we are increasing the per-child tax credit for working families.We are lowering taxes on small business. You know, a lot of business activity in America is conducted like the guy that does my dry cleaning. He’s an S corporation. He pays on his personal rate, and he is paying higher than the big dry-cleaning chain down the street, because he’s paying at his personal rate.RUBIO: Under my plan, no business, big or small, will pay more than 25 percent flat rate on their business income. That is a dramatic tax decrease for hard-working people who run their own businesses.(CROSSTALK)RUBIO: ...The other thing I’d like to make about our plan, one more point, it is the most pro growth tax plan that I can imagine because it doesn’t tax investments at all. You know why? Because the more you tax something, the less of it you get.I want to be in — I want America to be the best...PAUL: ...John...RUBIO: ...in the world for people...HARWOOD: Senator, thank you.PAUL: John, I’d like to address this? John, could I follow up on this?QUINTANILLA: ...We’ll come back around. I want to get to governor Kasich.PAUL: What are the rules on who gets to follow up. How do we decide on who gets to follow up? I’ve seen plenty of other people follow up?QUICK: It’s at the moderator discretion.QUINTANILLA: Governor Kasich, let’s talk ...(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: ...about Marijuana, Governor Kasich...PAUL: I’d like to just mention something about my tax plan, and how it relates to the discussion...QUINTANILLA: Alright, but 30 seconds, you made a case. Sure, 30 seconds.PAUL: Alright. Much of the discussion is centered over whether or not the different tax plans help, or affect the middle class. In fact, it’s the chief argument by democrats against many of the different flat tax proposals. Mine is unique in the sense that my tax plan actually gets rid of the payroll tax as well. It shifts it to the business, and it would allow middle class people to get a tax cut.If you just cut their income tax, there isn’t much income tax to cut. Mine actually cuts the payroll tax, and I think it would spread the tax cut across all socioeconomic levels, and would allow then it to be something that would be broadly supported by the public in an election.QUINTANILLA: Senator, thank you.CRUZ: Let me say on that...QUINTANILLA: Oh, no, no, no...CRUZ: ...Rand is exactly right. His plan is a good plan, and I will note that my 10% plan also eliminates the payroll tax, eliminates the death tax,QUINTANILLA: ...Ok...CRUZ: ...eliminates the business...MALE: (INAUDIBLE)CRUZ: ...income tax...MALE: What are you doing?CRUZ: ...10% flat rate...QUINTANILLA: ...We’re going to go to...CRUZ: ...is the lowest personal rate any candidate up here has, and what it would also enable us to do is for every citizen to fill out their taxes on a postcard so we can eliminate the IRS.(CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)QUINTANILLA: OK. Thank you, Senator. Governor Kasich, let’s talk about marijuana. We’re broadcasting from Colorado which has seen $150 million in new revenue for the state since legalizing last year. Governor Hickenlooper is not a big fan of legalization, but he’s said the people who used to be smoking it are still smoking it, they’re just now paying taxes.Given the budget pressures in Ohio, and other states, is this a revenue stream you’d like to have?KASICH: Well, first of all, we’re running a $2 billion dollar surplus, we’re not having a revenue problem right now. And, sending mixed signals to kids about drugs is a disaster. Drugs is one of the greatest scourge in this country, and I spent five years of my administration working with my team to do a whole sort of things to try to reign in the problem of overdoses, and it goes on and on. We could do a whole show on that.I want to go back for a second thought on this issue of income inequality. My program would move the 104 programs of the federal Department of Education into four block grants, and send them back to the states because income inequality is driven by a lack of skills when kids don’t get what they need to be able to compete and win in this country.The fact is, in order to get this economy moving again, I call for freezing regulations for a year except for the problem of public safety. I believe that we need to cut these taxes down, we need to be on a roadmap to balancing the budget, and we need to send power, money, and influence, the welfare department, the education department, job training, infrastructure, Medicaid, all of that out of Washington back to the states so we can run these programs from where we live to the top, not a one size fits all mentality that they have in Washington.And, that will get to the nub of opportunity for our children, and an ability to see wages rise. Again...(CROSSTALK)KASICH: ...One more time, in Ohio, our wages are growing faster than the national average. We’ve cut taxes, balanced budgets, changed the regulatory environment. Folks, you want to —QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor.KASICH: — fix America, this is the formula. It worked for Reagan and it works for our team in Ohio. Thank you.QUINTANILLA: Thank you. We’ll be back from Boulder, Colorado in just a moment.(APPLAUSE)(BREAK)QUICK: Welcome back to the University of Colorado and the Republican presidential debate right here on CNBC.Mr. Trump, I want to go back to an issue that we were talking about before, the H-1B visas. I found where I read that before. It was from the donaldjtrump.com website and it says — it says that again, Mark Zuckerburg’s personal senator, Marco Rubio has a bill to triple H-1Bs that would decimate women and minorities. Are you in favor of H-1Bs or are you opposed to them?TRUMP: I’m in favor of people coming into this country legally. And you know what? They can have it anyway you want. You can call it visas, you can call it work permits, you can call it anything you want. I’ve created tens of thousands of jobs, and in all due respect — and actually some of these folks I really like a lot — but I’m the only one that can say that. I have created tens of thousands of jobs, and I’ll be creating many millions of jobs if I’m given — if I’m given the opportunity to be president.As far as Mark is concerned, as far as the visas are concerned, if we need people, they have — it’s fine. They have to come into this country legally. We have a country of borders. We have a country of laws. We have to obey the laws. It’s fine if they come in, but they have to come in legally.QUICK: Thank you, sir.RUBIO: I was mentioned in the question.QUICK: You were. You get 30 seconds.RUBIO: Thank you.Well, I’ve learned the rules on this.(LAUGHTER)Look, in addition to what Donald was saying is we also need to talk about the legal immigration system for permanent residents. Today, we have a legal immigration system for permanent residency that is largely based on whether or not you have a relative living here. And that’s the way my parents came legally in 1956.But in 2015, we have a very different economy. Our legal immigration system from now on has to be merit-based. It has to be based on what skills you have, what you can contribute economically, and most important of all, on whether or not you’re coming here to become an American, not just live in America, but be an American.QUICK: Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Senator.Carl?QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump, you’ve said you have a special permit to carry a gun in New York.TRUMP: Yes.QUINTANILLA: After the Oregon mass shooting on October 1st, you said, “By the way, it was a gun-free zone. If you had a couple of teachers with guns, you would have been a hell of a lot better off.”TRUMP: Or somebody else. Right.QUINTANILLA: Would you feel more comfortable if your employees brought guns to work?TRUMP: Yes, I might feel more comfortable. I would say that I would and I have a permit, which is very unusual in New York — a permit to carry. And I do carry on occasion, sometimes a lot. But I like to be unpredictable so that people don’t know exactly... (LAUGHTER)QUINTANILLA: Are you carrying one now?(LAUGHTER)(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: By the way, unlike our country where we’re totally predictable and the enemy, whether it’s ISIS or anybody else, they know exactly what we’re doing because we have the wrong leadership.(APPLAUSE)But I feel that the gun-free zones and, you know, when you say that, that’s target practice for the sickos and for the mentally ill. That’s target. They look around for gun-free zones. You know, we could give you another example — the Marines, the Army, these wonderful six soldiers that were killed. Two of them were among the most highly decorated — they weren’t allowed on a military base to have guns. And somebody walked in and shot them, killed them. If they had guns, he wouldn’t be around very long. I can tell you, there wouldn’t have been much damage.So, I think gun-free zones are a catastrophe. They’re a feeding frenzy for sick people.QUINTANILLA: We called a few Trump resorts, a few Trump properties that — that do not allow guns with or without a permit. Would you change those policies?TRUMP: I would change them. I would change them.QUINTANILLA: OK. All right. Thank you.John?HARWOOD: Governor Huckabee, you’ve written about the huge divide in values between middle America and the big coastal cities like New York and Los Angeles. As a preacher as well as a politician, you know that presidents need the moral authority to bring the entire country together.The leading Republican candidate, when you look at the average of national polls right now, is Donald Trump. When you look at him, do you see someone with the moral authority to unite the country?HUCKABEE: You know, of the few questions I’ve got, the last one I need is to give him some more time. I love Donald Trump. He is a good man. I’m wearing a Trump tie tonight. Get over that one, OK?(APPLAUSE)(CROSSTALK)(UNKNOWN): Is it made in Mexico?HUCKABEE: I don’t know.(UNKNOWN): Where’s it made? Is it made in China?(UNKNOWN): Is it made in China or Mexico?HUCKABEE: I have no idea.(CROSSTALK)TRUMP: Such a nasty — such a nasty question, but thank you, Governor.HUCKABEE: You’re welcome.(LAUGHTER)Let me tell you, Donald Trump would be a president every day of the week and twice on Sunday, rather than Hillary. I’ve spent a lifetime in politics fighting the Clinton machine.(APPLAUSE)You want to talk about what we’re going to be up against next year? I’m the only guy on this stage — you know, everybody has an “only guy” — “I’m the only guy this; I’m the only guy that.” Well, let me tell you one thing that I am the only guy: The only guy that has consistently fought the Clinton machine every election I was ever in over the past 26 years. And not only did I fight them, but I beat them.Somebody says “I’m a fighter.” Well, I want to know, did you win? Well, I did. And not only did I fight them and win, I lived to tell about it and I’m standing on this stage tonight as evidence of that. And I think that ought to be worth something.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.CHRISTIE: John, I’ll tell you something. You want to talk about moral authority. Let’s talk about something that happened this week in the news. You know, the FBI director, the president’s appointed FBI director has said this week that because of a lack of support from politicians like the president of the United States, that police officers are afraid to get out of their cars; that they’re afraid to enforce the law. And he says, the president’s appointee, that crime is going up because of this.And when the president of the United States gets out to speak about it, does he support police officers? Does he stand up for law enforcement? No, he doesn’t. I’ll tell you this, the number one job of the president of the United States is to protect the safety and security of the American people. This president has failed, and when I’m in the Oval Office, police officers will know that they will have the support of the president of the Untied States. That’s real moral authority that we need in the Oval Office.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.Don’t forget my colleague, Sharon Epperson.EPPERSON: Thank you, John.Mrs. Fiorina, you were the CEO of a large corporation that offers a 401(k) to its employees. But more than half of American have no access to an employer sponsored retirement plan.That includes the workers at small businesses, and the growing ranks of Uber drivers and other part-timers in the freelance economy.Should the Federal Government play a larger role in helping to set up retirement plans for these workers?FIORINA: No, the Federal Government should not play a larger role.Look, every time the Federal Government gets engaged in something it gets worse. And then the Government steps in to try and solve the problem and we get a little further down to that progressive vision that Hillary Clinton is talking about.Companies should, if they want to attract the best workers, provide a good set of benefits. But honestly, if you’re a small business owner today you are being crushed. We have 400,000 small businesses forming every year in this country. How great is that? They are employing themselves, they are potentially employing others.The bad news is, we have 470,000 going out of business every year. And why? They cite Obamacare.They are refusing to...EPPERSON: So you wouldn’t agree — you wouldn’t agree with a start for 401(k) for businesses or anything like that?FIORINA: I think it’s a wonderful that that businesses start a 401(k). The point I’m making is this, the Federal Government should not be in a lot of things.There is no Constitutional role for the Federal Government in setting up — retirement plans. There is no Constitutional role for the Federal Government to be setting minimum wages...EPPERSON: Thank you very much.FIORINA: ... The more the Government gets engaged in the economy, the slower the economy becomes. The more the Government gets engaged in the economy, it is demonstrably true...EPPERSON: Thank you, the rules say one minute.FIORINA: ... The more the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected are advantaged.EPPERSON: Thank you, Ms. Fiorina. We appreciate it. Thank you, thank you.I want to turn my attention now, to you now, Governor Kasich.Most people can’t get a college degree without going into debt. Over 40 million Americans have student loans and many of them cannot pay them back.This country has over $100 billion in student loan defaults. That’s billion with a b.What will you do to make sure that students, their families, taxpayers, won’t feel the economic impact of this burden for generations?Well, first of all, in Ohio we’re changing the whole system. Universities will not get paid one dime unless the student graduates or — graduates or completes a course.Secondly, you can be in high school and complete almost an entire first year before you go to college and get credit to do that. And, of course, in addition to that, we are working now to go after the cost drivers in our universities. And let me give you an example. Universities today have so many non-academic assets. At Ohio State they sold the parking garage and the parking lot, and they got $500 million because they shouldn’t be in the parking lot business. They shouldn’t be in the ding business, they shouldn’t be in the dorm business.And, of course, we need to take advantage of on-line education to reduce these costs and begin to dis-intermediate the cost of four years.Now, for those who that have these big high costs, I think we can seriously look at an idea of where you can do public service. I mean legitimate, public service and begin to pay off some of that debt through the public service that you do. And in the meantime, it may inspire us to care more about our country, more about ourselves.This is a big moral issue in America. Living a life bigger than yourself, and being a center of healing and justice. And people can learn it through public service.EPPERSON: Thank you, thank you.BUSH: We don’t need the federal government to be involved in this at all.QUICK: Higher education is the example...BUSH: We don’t need the Federal Government to be involved in this, because when they do we create a $1.2 trillion debt.In Florida, we have the lowest in-state tuition of any state, because there’s accountability, just as John said. Let the states do this. You’ll create a much better graduation rate at a lower cost, and you won’t in debt the next generation with recourse debt on their backs.It’s always a solution of the left to create more Government from the Federal Government. It is broke, it is not working.(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: Governor Bush, daily fantasy sports has become a phenomenon in this country, will award billions of dollars in prize money this year. But to play you have to assess your odds, put money at risk, wait for an outcome that’s out of your control. Isn’t that the definition of gambling, and should the Federal Government treat it as such?BUSH: Well, first of all, I’m 7 and 0 in my fantasy league.QUINTANILLA: I had a feeling you were going to brag about that.BUSH: Gronkowski is still going strong. I have Ryan Tannehill, Marco, as my quarterback, he was 18 for 19 last week. So I’m doing great. But we’re not gambling.And I think this has become something that needs to be looked at in terms of regulation. Effectively it is day trading without any regulation at all. And when you have insider information, which apparently has been the case, where people use that information and use big data to try to take advantage of it, there has to be some regulation.If they can’t regulate themselves, then the NFL needs to look at just, you know, moving away from them a little bit. And there should be some regulation. I have no clue whether the federal government is the proper place, my instinct is to say, hell no, just about everything about the federal government.(CROSSTALK)CHRISTIE: Carl, are we really talking about getting government involved in fantasy football?(LAUGHTER)We have — wait a second, we have $19 trillion in debt. We have people out of work. We have ISIS and al Qaeda attacking us. And we’re talking about fantasy football? Can we stop?(APPLAUSE)CHRISTIE: How about this? How about we get the government to do what they’re supposed to be doing, secure our borders, protect our people, and support American values and American families. Enough on fantasy football. Let people play, who cares?(CROSSTALK)QUICK: I want to go back, if I can, to the issue of...(CROSSTALK)QUICK: I want to go back, if I may, to the... HARWOOD: Governor Christie, you’ve said something that many in your party do not believe, which is that climate change is undeniable, that human activity contributes to it, and you said, quote: “The question is, what do we do to deal with it?”.So what do we do?CHRISTIE: Well, first off, what we don’t do is do what Hillary Clinton and John Kerry and Barack Obama want us to do, which is their solution for everything, put more taxes on it, give more money to Washington, D.C., and then they will fix it.Well, there is no evidence that they can fix anything in Washington, D.C.HARWOOD: What should we do?CHRISTIE: What we should do is to be investing in all types of energy, John, all types of energy. I’ve laid out...HARWOOD: You mean government?CHRISTIE: No, John. John, do you want me to answer or do you want to answer?(LAUGHTER)How are we going to do this?(APPLAUSE)Because, I’ve got to tell you the truth, even in New Jersey what you’re doing is called rude. So...(LAUGHTER)We’ve laid out a national energy plan that says that we should invest in all types of energy. I will tell you, you could win a bet at a bar tonight, since we’re talking about fantasy football, if you ask who the top three states in America are that produce solar energy: California and Arizona are easy, but number three is New Jersey.Why? Because we work with the private sector to make solar energy affordable and available to businesses and individuals in our state.We need to make sure that we do everything across all kinds of energy: natural gas, oil, absolutely. But also where it’s affordable, solar, wind in Iowa has become very affordable and it makes sense.That is the way we deal with global warming, climate change, or any of those problems, not through government intervention, not through government taxes, and for God’s sake, don’t send Washington another dime until they stop wasting the money they’re already sending there.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.(APPLAUSE)HARWOOD: Becky.QUICK: Senator Paul, among the leading conservative opponents to the creation of Medicare back in the 1960s was Ronald Reagan. He warned that it would lead to socialism. Considering the mounting cost of Medicare, was he right to oppose it?PAUL: The question always is, what works better, the private marketplace or government? And what distributes goods better? It always seems to be the private marketplace does a better job.Is there an area for a safety net? Can you have Medicare or Social Security? Yes. But you ought to acknowledge the government doesn’t do a very good job at it.The main problem with Medicare right now is that the average person pays in taxes over their whole lifetime about $100,000. But the average person takes out about $350,000. We have this enormous mismatch because we have smaller and smaller families.When people ask me, whose fault is it? Whose fault is it that Medicare is broken, out of money, that Social Security is broken, out of money? And I say, look, it’s not Republicans’ fault, it’s not Democrats’ fault, it’s your grandparents’ fault for having too many damn kids.(LAUGHTER)After the war we had all of these kids, Baby Boomers. Now we’re having smaller families. We used to have 16 workers for one retiree, now you have three workers for one retiree.It’s not working. I have a bill to fix Medicare. I’ve a bill to fix Social Security. For both of them you have to gradually raise the age. If you’re not willing to do that, nobody wants to do it, but if you’re not willing to gradually raise the age, you’re not serious about fixing either one of them.QUICK: Senator, thank you.UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Becky, may I...QUINTANILLA: This is the— well, we’re going to take a break. We want to save time for closing statements after the break.So this is the Republican presidential debate in Boulder, and we’ll be right back.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)(APPLAUSE)QUICK: Welcome back to Boulder, Colorado and the Republican presidential debate right here on CNBC.Governor Huckabee, you wanted to respond to the points that Senator Rand Paul was just making when it comes to Social Security. Your time, sir.HUCKABEE: Well, and specifically to Medicare, Becky, because 85 percent of the cost of Medicare is chronic disease. The fact is if we don’t address what’s costing so much, we can’t throw enough money at this. And it’s why I’ve continued to focus on the fact that we need to declare war on the four big cost drivers because 80 percent of all medical costs in this country are chronic disease. We don’t have a health care crisis in America, we have a health crisis.And until we deal with the health of Americans and do what we did with polio — when I was a little kid, we eradicated it. You know how much money we spent on polio last year in America? We didn’t spend any. We’ve saved billions of dollars.You want to fix Medicare? Focus on the diseases that are costing us the trillions of dollars. Alzheimers, diabetes, heart disease and cancer. Eradicate those and you fix Medicare and you’ve fixed America, its economy and you’ve made people’s lives a heck of a lot better.BUSH: Becky —QUICK: Thank you, Governor.(APPLAUSE)BUSH: — the governor’s absolutely right. But we also need to reform Medicare and Social Security. We can’t just allow it to continue on its current path the way that Hillary Clinton wants to do because there’ll be major reductions in benefits in the next decade if we do nothing.I have a concrete plan to do just that, which allows people to keep HSAs to encourage savings, it allows for people that are retiring with Social Security to be able to get a minimum of 125 percent of the poverty level so that there is a baseline that in this generous country of ours no one goes below.HARWOOD: Governor Bush, Mr. Trump says that he is capable of growing the economy so much that Social Security and Medicare don’t have to be touched. Do you want to explain how that is going to happen, Mr. Trump?TRUMP: Yes, it’s very simple. We’re going to make a really dynamic economy from what we have right now, which is not at all dynamic. We’re going to bring jobs back from Japan, we’re going to bring jobs back from China, we’re going to bring, frankly, jobs back from Mexico where, as you probably saw, Nabisco is leaving Chicago with one of their biggest plants, and they’re moving it to Mexico.We’re going to bring jobs and manufacturing back. We’re going to cut costs. We’re going to save Social Security, and we’re going to save Medicare.(UNKNOWN): Governor, you just heard him.BUSH: You have to reform Social Security, and the simple way to do it is to make sure that the wealthiest don’t receive the same benefits as people that are lower-income.And make sure you enhance savings in the private market. The idea of 401(k)s. I have a small business that I set up. It took — it took an arm and a leg to be able to set up a 401(k). Because of all the federal mandates and federal laws, it was too expensive.We need to incent private savings and make sure that Social Security is protected for those that have it.KASICH: John.BUSH: But the idea that you can’t — that you’re just gonna grow your way out of this — I have a plan to grow the economy at 4 percent, but you’re gonna have to make adjustments for both Medicare and Social Security.(UNKNOWN): Governor Kasich, do you want 30 seconds?KASICH: I wanna tell you, in my state, we took Medicaid, the hardest program to control, and we took it from a 10 percent growth rate to 2.5 percent without taking one person off the rolls or cutting one single benefit.And so much of what we did — to force competition, to use technology, to stand down the special interest groups — can you imagine taking Medicaid from 10 to 2.5 percent?We can take many of those same procedures, we can apply it to Medicare. We can make a stronger program. But I agree with Jeb, you can’t just do this by growing the economy. You can’t grow your way out of demographics.But we can give people better health care. And finally, on health care, why don’t we start treating — keep giving...QUICK: Governor.KASICH: ...incentives for people to keep people healthy, rather than giving the incentives to treat them when they’re sick?QUICK: Governor, thank you.Senator Paul, let’s go back to you. Do these solutions sound like they work?PAUL: Say again?QUICK: Do these solutions sound like they would work?PAUL: You can’t do nothing. And that’s what I hear from some people, “we’ll do nothing and it will just be fixed.” That’s absurd, and I think people who don’t want to fix it, really, or unwilling to take the chance to say, “something has to change,” are missing the boat here.The age will have to gradually rise, there is no question. It’s the only way you fix Medicare, the only way you fix Social Security. You will also have to means-test the benefits and declare there’s not enough money.It isn’t “I put money in, I’m getting it back.” There is no money, it’s a stack of paper. There is no money in the Social Security account. There is no money in the Medicare account. There’s only a promise to pay by the next generation, and the next generation’s not big enough to pay it.(CROSSTALK)(UNKNOWN): ...to deal with this. We did it 200 days ago.HARWOOD: Hold on, Governor. I’ve got a question for — for Dr. Carson.CARSON: About Medicare?HARWOOD: Yes. You’ve said that you would like to replace Medicare with a system of individual family savings accounts, so that families could cover their own expenses.Obviously, that would be a very controversial idea. Explain how that would work, exactly.CARSON: Well, first of all the — the plan gives people the option of — of opting out. But I think they will see a very good option here. You know, the annual Medicare budget is over $600 billion. And there are 48 million people involved — 40 million, 65 and over, and 8 million other.Divide that out. That comes out to $12,500 for each one. Now, I can tell you there are a lot of private-sector things that you could do with $12,500, which will get you a lot more than you get from this government program.And that’s really a theme of a lot of the things that I’m talking about. How do we utilize our intellect rather than allowing the government to use its, quote, “intellect,” in order to help us to be able to live healthier and better lives?It was never intended that the government should be in every aspect of our lives. This is a country that is of, for and by the people.QUICK: Thank you, Dr. Carson.Governor?CHRISTIE: And — and — and I — you know, Ben is absolutely right in saying that what we don’t need to do is to send more money to Washington, D.C. to fix this problem.And that’s what you’ll hear from Hillary Clinton — and I’ve already heard from her — is that, send more money in Social Security, send more money in Medicare taxes, send more money for Medicaid, and that’s gonna solve the problem.What we know is we’re living longer. That’s a blessing. It’s a blessing that we’re living longer, so we have to increase the retirement age to reflect that blessing.We need to make sure that people understand, as Jeb said before, that if you’ve done extraordinarily well in this country, do you want them to take more out of your taxes now and think they’re gonna give it back to you later? Or would you rather take less later on?QUINTANILLA: Senator Rubio...HARWOOD: Governor, do you also think that...QUINTANILLA: ...yeah, I just wanted (inaudible).HARWOOD: ...that Dr. Carson’s right, that we can replace Medicare with individual savings accounts?RUBIO: No. No. What I said was that I think that Dr. Carson’s ideas are good ideas. They’re not my ideas, and I don’t necessarily agree with all of them.But this is what you’re seeing in the Republican debate that you didn’t see in that Democrat debate.You didn’t see it for a minute. You didn’t see these kind of ideas being batted around, and being batted around in a way that’s civil and smart and that’s trying to help to inform the voter out there.What you saw was a parade of, “I’ll give you this for free; I’ll give you that for free.”Let me tell you, everybody, when they say they want to give it to you for free, keep your hands on your wallets because they’re coming to you to pay for it. And that’s why I think these ideas up here are great, and that’s what we should have is have more discussions like this and less gotcha.(CROSSTALK)QUINTANILLA: I want to give you 30 seconds here.RUBIO: I want to take off from that point and argue the same thing. And that is that one of the things you’re watching tonight are 11 quality candidates debating an important issue. The Republican Party is blessed to have 11 good candidates, (inaudible) 10 good candidates. The Democrats can’t even come up with one.And on this issue of the Medicare in particular, it’s important because they’re going to demagogue what we’re saying here tonight. Everyone up here tonight that’s talking about reforms, I think and I know for myself I speak to this, we’re all talking about reforms for future generations. Nothing has to change for current beneficiaries. My mother is on Medicare and Social Security. I’m against anything that’s bad for my mother.(LAUGHTER)So, we’re talking about — we’re talking about reform for people like me and people like Senator Cruz, as he talked about earlier, who are years away from retirement that have a way to plan for these changes, and way that’s very reasonable. And it’s not too much to ask of our generation after everything our parents and our grandparents did for us.FIORINA: John, I — if I — a lot of people have jumped in here. I’d like to jump in. A lot of people have jumped in here.HARWOOD: Mrs. Fiorina, we’re right at the end of our time.FIORINA: I understand.HARWOOD: You all wanted us to limit (inaudible).All right. Go ahead.FIORINA: I would just say that...(LAUGHTER)... I would just say this, we’ve heard a lot of great ideas up here, and I agree with what Senator Rubio said. Every election we talk about this. Every election we talk about Medicare and Social Security reform. It never happens.I would like to start with a basic. Let us actually go to zero- based budgeting so we know where the money is being spent. It’s kind of basic. There is a bill sitting in the House that would actually pass and have us go to zero-based budgeting so we know where every dime of your money is being spent instead of only talking about how much more we’re going to spend year after year after year.My point is this. While there are lots of good ideas for reform, we have never tackled the basics. And we finally need to tackle the basics to cut this government down to size and hold it accountable. So let’s start by knowing where your money is being spent by the federal government.HARWOOD: We have now reached the point in the program where candidates are going to give their closing statements, 30 seconds apiece. We’re going to go right to left and start with you, Senator Paul.PAUL: Liberty thrives when government is small. I want a government so small I can barely see it. I want a government so small that the individual has a chance to thrive and prosper. I think, though, government is too big now. And what you’re going to see in Washington this week is establishment Republicans have made an agreement with the president to raise the debt ceiling in an unlimited fashion; no limit to the debt ceiling raise.This is extraordinary. It’s extraordinarily wrong. You’ll see me on the floor of the Senate tomorrow filibustering this and saying enough is enough, no more debt.HARWOOD: Governor Christie?CHRISTIE: I want to talk to the folks at home. I want to ask you: Are you fed up with how Washington taxes you? Are you fed up with how Washington wastes your money? Are you concerned like I am that the debt and deficits of Washington, D.C. are endangering America’s future?I’ve got one more question for you then. Are you serious about this election? Because if you are, you need to elect someone who’s deadly serious about changing this culture. I am deadly serious about changing this culture. I changed it in New Jersey. I’m deadly serious about doing this job the right way.I’m prepared. I’m tested. I’m ready. And I want to make this our government. For the people who say we can’t do it, I say hell no, we can do it together.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.Senator Cruz?CRUZ: You know, everyone here talks about the need to take on Washington. The natural next question is who actually has done so. Who actually has stood up not just to Democrats, but to leaders in our own party? When millions of Americans rose up against Obamacare, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up against amnesty, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up against Planned Parenthood, I was proud to lead that fight.If people are promising they’re going to take on Washington and cronyism, you need to look to who has been doing it. In my family, my dad fled oppression in Cuba to come to America. Freedom is personal for me, and I will always keep my word and fight for freedom.HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator.Mrs. Fiorina?FIORINA: You know, every election we hear a lot of talk. We hear a lot of good plans. We hear actually a lot of good intentions. But somehow for decades, nothing really has changed. What we need now is a proven leader who has produced results. That’s how you go from secretary to CEO. You lead and you produce results. I will cut this government down to size and hold it accountable, simplify the tax code, roll back the regulations that have been spewing out of Washington, D.C. for 50 years.I may not be your dream candidate just yet, but I can assure you I am Hillary Clinton’s worst nightmare. And in your heart of hearts, you cannot wait to see a debate between Hillary Clinton and Carly Fiorina. I will tell you this, I will beat Hillary Clinton. And with your vote and your support and your prayers, I will lead with the citizens of this great nation the resurgence of this great nation.HARMAN: Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina.Dr. Carson?CARSON: I just want to thank all my colleagues here for being civil, and not falling for the traps. And, I also just want to thank the audience for being attentive, and noticing the questions, and the noticing the answers. And, this is what I am finding throughout America.People are waking up because it is going to be us who will determine the direction of our country. And, it was made for we the people, we are the ones who decide who we are, and we should never give away the values and principles that made America into a great nation for the sake of political correctness.(APPLAUSE)HARWOOD: Mr. Trump?TRUMP: Our country doesn’t win anymore. We used to win, we don’t win anymore. We lose on trade. We lose with ISIS. We lose with one of the worst deals I’ve ever seen negotiated of any kind, that’s our recent catastrophe with Iran. We don’t win.Let me give you one quick example. These folks, CNBC, they had it down at three, three and a half hours. I just read today in the New York Times, $250,000 for a 30 second ad. I went out and said, it’s ridiculous. Nobody — I could stand up here all night. Nobody wants to watch three and a half, or three hours. It was a back sacrifice, and I have to hand it to Ben.We called Ben, he was with me 100%. We called in, we said, that’s it. We’re not doing it. They lost a lot of money, everybody said it couldn’t be done. Everybody said it was going to be three hours, three and a half, including them, and in about two minutes I renegotiated it so we can get the hell out of here. Not bad.(APPLAUSE)TRUMP: And, I’ll do that with the country. We will make America great again. And, thank you everybody. Just for the record.HARWOOD: Just for the record, the debate was always going to be two hours. Senator Rubio?TRUMP: That’s not right. That is absolutely not right. You know that. That is not right.MALE: Thank you.HARWOOD: Senator Rubio.RUBIO: You know, America doesn’t owe me anything. I have a debt to America I’ll never repay. This isn’t just the country I was born in, this is the nation that literally changed the history of my family. My parents in this country were able to give me the chance to do all the things they never did. We call that the American Dream, although, it’s built on the universal dream of a better life.The fact that it’s happened for so many people here throughout our history, that’s what makes us special. But, now for millions of Americans, it’s slipping away. And, we have a government and leaders in government that are completely out of touch, and that’s why I’m running for president. Because we can’t just save the American Dream, we can expand it to reach more people, and change more lives than ever before.And, that’s why tonight I’m asking you for your vote.HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator. Governor Bush?BUSH: America’s at a crossroads. The D.C. politicians continue to make things worse. I have a proven record of success, 32 years in business, and 8 years as Governor of the state of Florida.I will change the culture in Washington, just as I changed the culture in Tallahassee. I will do so in a way that will bring people together. We need a unifier, not a cynical divider in chief, and that’s exactly what I will do.Imagine a country where people are lifted out of poverty again. Imagine a country where the middle class can get rising income again. I know we can do this because we’re still the most extraordinary country on the face of the Earth.HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor. Governor Huckabee.HUCKABEE: You know, I know to a lot of people in the media, this is just a great big game, and we’re the players. And, we come out here, and we do our thing. And, sometimes we’re held up in contempt by people who write columns, but, I guarantee you to every person on this stage there’s something deep inside of us that would cause us to give up our livelihoods and step out on this stage and fight for the people of America.I’ve got five grandkids. I do not want to walk my five grandkids through the charred remains of a once great country called America, and say, “Here you go, $20 trillion dollars of debt. Good luck making something out of this mess.”And, for those of us who are serious enough to run for president, think long and hard why we’re here, and hopefully you’ll know we’re not here for ourselves. We honest to god are here to get this country back on track. I know this, I certainly am.HARWOOD: Thank you...HUCKABEE: ...Thank you.HARWOOD: Governor Kasich?KASICH: I was on morning Joe at a town hall and a young student stood up and said, “Can I still be idealistic?”I said, absolutely, you can still change the world. And, you know the old inscription, if you save one life, you’ve changed the world. Folks, we have a problem here with the leadership in Washington, but I’ll tell you another problem. We need to rebuild our families. We need to have stronger families. We need to know who our neighbors are. We need to come together as a country because we have to realize that America is great, not from the top-down. Oh yeah, we want to elect a good president, but America is great from the bottom-up, and the bottom-up is us in our families, in our communities, in our neighborhoods. We will renew America if we work together, and I am totally confident that we will. And God bless America.(APPLAUSE)HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.QUINTANILLA: That concludes tonight’s debate. On behalf of my colleagues Becky Quick, John Harwood, Sharon Epperson, Rick Santelli and Jim Cramer, we’d like to our host, the University of Colorado at Boulder, the Republican National Committee, the candidates and, of course, tonight’s audience.CNBC’s Kelly Evans and Joe Kernan pick up our continuing coverage.ENDFind out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »Go to Home Page »
AdvertisementSupported byOp-Ed ContributorBy Joshua DavisSAN FRANCISCO — WHEN audiences watch the movie “Spare Parts” in theaters this month, they will see the kind of Hollywood ending that has eluded the immigration debate in Congress. The film is based on my reporting about four young immigrants who built an underwater robot. In the movie, which closely reflects the true story, the students enter the nation’s pre-eminent robotics competition, an event sponsored by NASA and the Navy. They win widespread recognition for their accomplishments and, when the movie ends in 2004, their future is bright. Unfortunately, that’s not how the story really ends. All four students were born in Mexico and were brought across the border illegally as children. Though they grew up in Arizona and viewed themselves as Americans, the law did not. They lived with the daily threat of deportation. Oscar Vazquez dreamed of joining the Army — he was officer of the year in his J.R.O.T.C. program — but discovered he couldn’t enlist because he didn’t have legal residency. Cristian Arcega was a geeky brainiac who found few outlets for his smarts in gang-torn West Phoenix. Lorenzo Santillan was a former gang member himself looking to stay clean. And Luis Aranda, the only one who had gotten a work permit, just the year before, was a hulking giant of a kid who rarely spoke. This ragtag group from Carl Hayden Community High School in West Phoenix constructed the robot out of cheap plastic tubing and garbage. It smelled so bad, they called the machine Stinky. The other entrants — almost all college students — had corporate sponsors and serious budgets. This was an underwater robotics contest, but Carl Hayden didn’t even have a swimming pool. Nonetheless, Stinky came in first place. After the event, lower ranked contestants went on to rewarding jobs at tech companies and research institutes. Meanwhile, the Carl Hayden students struggled to afford tuition for college. Lorenzo Santillan considered becoming a mechanical engineer, but instead earned a cheaper associate degree in cooking. Today he works as a line cook. Luis Aranda studied cooking as well but did not complete a degree and now works as a janitor.Cristian Arcega, the most technically skilled member of the team, made it to Arizona State University on a scholarship. But in 2006, during his freshman year, Arizona voters passed Proposition 300, an anti-immigrant measure that prohibits undocumented students from receiving any state financial aid or qualifying for in-state tuition — more than tripling his tuition. He dropped out and is now unemployed. He is trying to crowdfund enough money to return to school full time.Oscar Vazquez’s story is the most dramatic. He also had a scholarship to A.S.U., and after working menial jobs for a year, was able to attend. He was a sophomore when Proposition 300 passed, and managed to stay in school only by piecing together more scholarships, all while leading the university’s robotics team to regional championships. He graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering in 2009 and applied for legal residency. Not only was his application denied, but he was also summarily banned from the United States for 10 years for living here without a visa. He ended up working on an assembly line in Mexico. After a year, his ban was reversed when Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, interceded on his behalf. Mr. Vazquez returned, enlisted in the Army, and served a tour of combat duty in Afghanistan. He is finally a citizen, and repairs trains in Montana for the railroad company BNSF.Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, the program created by President Obama’s executive order that shields some undocumented students and young adults from deportation, didn’t go into effect until 2012. Had it been in place when the Carl Hayden students were in high school, allowing them to legally work, their lives might have turned out very differently. They have surmounted enormous odds, but none were able to professionally pursue their passion for robotics. It is a startling rebuke to the American dream. House Republicans seem to view this as a fitting outcome. This week, John A. Boehner, the speaker of the House, introduced legislation that would roll back the president’s order. If he is successful, talented young people like Mr. Santillan and Mr. Arcega could be deported at any moment. “After a while you get used to disappointment,” Mr. Arcega said to me this week. “I try not to have high expectations anymore.”Those who oppose granting residency to these immigrants argue that it would deny resources to existing residents and citizens. But we’ve already invested in these students all through elementary and high school. Why not continue and get a return on that investment?There is rising demand for the talent these students possess. We grant roughly 85,000 H1B visas, for immigrants with special skills, to engineers to fill jobs here. In doing so, we overlook a generation of students who are deemed foreigners but who grew up here and plan to stay. When their visas expire, a majority of H1B visa holders will leave, and take the skills they developed with them. At a time when science and technology prowess will be critical to this country’s growth, we can’t afford to squander the homegrown brainpower of students like Oscar, Lorenzo, Luis and Cristian.  Joshua Davis is the co-founder of Epic Magazine and a contributing editor at Wired. His book “Spare Parts” follows the 2004 Carl Hayden Robotics Team. AdvertisementCollapseSEE MY OPTIONS
